WS 62 THE 7TH MEETING OF THE DYNAMIC COALITION ON CHILD ONLINE SAFETY 




  
                         EIGHTH INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM
                                    BALI
           BUILDING BRIDGES - ENHANCING MULTI-STAKEHOLDER COOPERATION
                   FOR GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
                               24 OCTOBER, 2013
                                    14:30
                                    No. 62
                    THE 7TH MEETING OF THE DYNAMIC COALITION
                            ON CHILD ONLINE SAFETY
   

The following is the output of the real-time captioning taken during the Eigth Meeting of the IGF, in Bali, Indonesia. Although it is largely accurate, in some cases it may be incomplete or inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to understanding the proceedings at the session, but should not be treated as an authoritative record.

 
 
    ...
    IGF
    24 October, 2013
    14:30 p.m.
    No. 62 the 7th meeting of the Dynamic Coalition on child online
                safety
    Testing, testing.
    >> Testing.  Test, test, test. ...
    >> Hello, this is room 3, can our participants hear us?  In Bakahear
  us?
    Maybe if so, you can send me a text message.
    Hello to Becca, can you talk?
    >> Anjan, we need you back.
    >> Good afternoon, everyone.  I think we are ready to start now.
  Just the logistics of passing on the presentations.  Just bear with us
  one minute and we will start.
    >> Good afternoon, once again.  And welcome to the 7th version of our
  Dynamic Coalition and there are lots of known faces around the room and
  a few new members.
    My name is Anjan Bose, I'm with ECPAT international.  Just a quick
  update about why we are here.  This is a permanent platform that we
  have managed to secure to advance our work at this very big policy
  discussions that is happening.  On Internet get Nans and this brings us
  space to bring the child protection and the Internet issues with a much
  higher and global audience.
    Usually woo go around the room and introduce each other, but we
  decided not to do it this time because everybody knows each other.
    But having said that, I will take the liberty to introduce three of
  our new members.  We have over there at the back please, if you can
  raise your hand, at the representatives from the Ellen na and Madeline
  foundation and they're represented by Judith -- none if I pronounce
  your last name, is it Mucumbo?
    Sorry, I got the -- the spelling is not very clear here.  And the
  general manager for programmes, Fiona Mckin tosh, and the cyber
  specialist, Jeremy blackman.  They're a new member to our coalition.
  He just joined.  We have a representative from disk foundation who is
  proudly attending another workshop at the same time.  I just forgot to
  mention.
    We have a few members who are missing from the room today.  That's
  because of the scheduling of IGF didn't allow this participation, you
  know, because there is another cyber child and youth participation
  workshop happening, which they are either panelists or need to attend.
  So it's a pity, but that's how it is.
    Having said that, I would give you a very, very quick introduction of
  what we are going to do for this session today.  Unlike previous years
  where we do a lot of information sharing, information exchange, sharing
  good practices and initiative, which we still try to allude to at the
  beginning in terms of what our members do and see as challenge through
  the course of their work; this year we had decided to focus on child
  sexual abuse materials.  And why did we do in a?
    How we are going to -- what we are going to do, I will allow Mr. John
  Carr, who you all know is the leading expert on child online abuse
  issue, and he has joined ECPAT international as our global advisor on
  child online safety.  And he will lead that session on what we want to
  do on child sexual abuse materials and how -- what are our propositions
  in terms of what we need to get.  It will be an open discussion.
  Leading to that as a prop that leads us to that discussion we have
  three presentations today.  On my left, I just want to introduce you to
  the panelists.  We have Susie Hargreaves, from the Internet wash
  foundation, we have Mr. Russell Chadwick from infaux, and on my right,
  Linda Chadwick from -- who's based in Singapore.  A paper -- a segment
  of -- in a specific version of appointment.  And she will -- they will
  be presenting their work in relation to child sexual abuse as that fits
  in the context of our core discussions today.
    But as I said today, I just want today give you a glimpse of what our
  members are doing, we have a diverse set of membership.  Some of them
  are in education and awareness, but clearly the ones we have not --
  from ministry of ICT in Egypt and Navin has been very much engaged from
  the beginning in terms of education and awareness and in terms of
  policy.  And also within the Arab region, a lot of legal reform work.
    And talking of Navine, I want to introduce another new member.  Apos
  NPO, a national representative of the ee gyp Sean commit at this
  represented by Mr. Hassan Hamal, who is not here today but is a new
  member.  What this diverse set of people bring to the table is a
  research of experience and resources that every member from different
  region can benefit from.  And we are not going to delve into what each
  one of us are doing but in summary, the key areas of work are online
  safety, resources of work, child participation, education and
  awareness, and also working at legal reform project, working with
  ministries, and both regional and international levels.
    So it's a cross-cutting flat form.  We do have representation from
  the industry -- we have in house -- I'm sorry, IWF and also from GSMA,
  who is not able to come here today.
    Fiemly, I would just like to give the floor very briefly from Prita
  from ITU, who is also one of our members, ITU is a member of the
  dynamic coalition, very briefly to present what they're doing in terms
  of the kop guidelines for industries.  I will just pull up the slide
  and if Prita -- yes.  And my apologies for missing out Jacqueline and
  Kim who are very much in forefront.  Are representing Microsoft.  And I
  do beg your apologies for omitting you from the industry partners.  My
  apologies.
    Am I missing anyone who is here who is a regular?
    And then Judith Krol is here.  I'm looking, but I have a very long
  side.  So Judith is here, one of our founder members representing
  digital -- I can never pronounce the full name in German.  It's -- she
  does a lot of work with young people giving them empowerment and access
  in Germany.  That's the kind of strength at that we have, the diversity
  of our members.  So Prita, if you would like to say a couple of words,
  I can pull up the slides.
    >> There will be just one slide.
    >> Prita:  Before I do that, I want to thank Anjan for inviting us.
  My colleague Karla is the one who works on this topic.  I'm sure most
  of you know here.  If you -- please pass on your cards if you need to
  get in touch with her.  I will make sure that...
    Specifically on the guidelines, of course you might know that in 2009
  ITU working with the kop partners released a set of guidelines, for
  children, guidance and educators, for industry and policy-makers.
    And this year working with child protection, a group of member,
  multistakeholder group including all core partner, decided it's time
  for the industry guidelines to be updated.  Since 2009 the world has
  moved quite a bit.  Technologies have changed.  Access to technologies
  have changed, ideas have changed.
    So since the beginning of this year, ITU with the core partners have
  been working on revising the guidelines.  And we are particularly
  grateful to union self in this regard because they have taken the lead
  in the editorship of this new revised guideline.  We've gone through
  multiple set of iterations.  I think many in this room have
  contributed.  We are grateful to them.  Right now we are at a stage
  where we have a draft guideline that we now require mult stakeholder
  input.  And the open forum we had this morning, the IT U -- one step in
  the multistakeholder input and we are thankful for the input we
  received.  We put the guidelines on line and you will see the link
  there.
    And it will be -- tonight it will also be directly accessible from
  the ITU and UNICEF website.  UNICEF.org -- we thank you for making the
  guidelines much better and useful to all of you.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you, Prita.  That is a wrap-up of the session
  they had this morning.  That was more of like an update from our
  general member sections.  I would be very happy if you can take the --
  you know, outside of this forum after we finish, to keep in touch and
  to share the resources and connect with each other on a continuous
  basis as a platform for sharing information.  Because we only meet once
  a year.
    At this forum.  We should be using the online platforms of other
  channels of communication to keep our interactions going.  With that
  said, I'd just like to open the presentation section for today.  As I
  said before, we have three presentation, all reeled to in some ways,
  the element of child -- combatting child sexual abuse materials online.
  And my first speaker is Russell Chadwick from inhope who is combg to
  give you overall umbrella understanding of how do they see the problem,
  what kind of reports are emerging and the trends.
    So without further ado I pass the floor to you, Russell.
    >> RUSSELL CHADWICK:  Good afternoon, everybody.  And I would like to
  say thank you to ECPAT for giving me the opportunity to speak.
    For hose those of you who don't know what inhope do, I put together
  some slides which will outline the work that we're association, and
  also give you some information on what we provide to our stakeholders
  which is Loren Holtzman.  So who we are.  We were founded in 1999, in
  the safe Internet programme.  To combat child sexual abuse material.
  And we're an umbrella organisation, we represent 44 hotlines and 38 --
  and head quarters is in Amsterdam, even though I'm based in the U K.
  And I travel over to brus Zells and Amsterdam on an annual basis.  Our
  membership -- what do we do?
    We support and then house the performance of the hotlines.  So we try
  and share best practice, training modules to improve the effectiveness
  of the hotlines.  We also take down and -- content as quickly as
  possible.  We assess -- take down the monitor, and we've got working
  partnerships with law enforcement and Internet centres around the
  world.  So why are our statistics important?
    And we collect accurate statistics to be able to pass through to
  stakeholders.  We provide actionable intelligence and report leads, we
  build a global picture of what activity is going on on the Internet,
  illegal child sexual abuse material and we give fact actual information
  to the stakeholders on the trends.  And the data.
    We developed our own in-house database, which is called the HR -- and
  for the hotlines too.
    And now looking at the role and the process, we've got 44 hotlines,
  150 analysts that assess content, trace -- they deposit -- they see
  some -- into the database, so play back information.  And then we
  liaise with law enforcement and take down issues.  And they notice the
  content on the Internet.
    We -- one of our objectives is to reduce the time that the illegal
  content is on the Internet.
    So one of our goals is to move as quickly as possible much so it's
  all about closer participation of stakeholders.
    Strategic alliances are very important to us.  So if you look -- I'm
  not going to move through all of these many but you can see from the
  slide, we've got a lot of strategic partnerships in the industry.
  We've -- with government, with NGOs.
    Now, this part of the presentation, showing you some statistical data
  and actual statistical data on the first challenge with material so
  hotlines are for a variety of agreements on a national basis.  But
  typically what we look for is hosting in categories.  We consider --
  pornography, and child sexual tourism, child trafficking.  Violence,
  racism, and againphobia, and also terrorism.  The hotlines do offer a
  broader categories than -- in some respects.  But those are the common
  categories that all association members and -- relate to.  Statistics
  so far, we have had 47,000 public -- suspected illegal content.
    And this graphic is showing you where that content's going from
  currently.  So 40 percent of it is coulding in EU and 42 percent from
  the U.S. and Canada, and 18 percent the rest of the world.
    Really interesting data.
    (.
    And so looking at trend data.  So worrying development is increasing
  incidence of very young children as victims.  We've got age category,
  and based on the findings, 12 percent of victims are infants.  And this
  last year was 9 percent.
    79 percent of the victims are female.  11 percent are male.
    And this is a graphic that we've got in our own report.  And shows
  that data.  I will be able to read.
    And also it's commercial and -- hosting.  And when we say commercial,
  that means a financial transaction is taking place.  And it's about 11
  percent of new volume.  It's huge.  So this is another slide that we
  produce for the European finance coalition.  This shows the trend data
  in commercial hosting by country on a global scale.
    So network action -- which is really interesting data.  34 percent of
  commercial and -- 34,000 reports have been put into the database of
  commercial activity so far.  That represents 94 -- 95 percent of global
  hosting.  So we're capturing the data.  This next slide actually gives
  you the hosting countries.  And as of those dates, and then looking at
  nonin hope and hosting countries.
    So you can see that we can start and put together a global view.  We
  see something hosted, and it gives us the opportunity to be able to
  take that data down.
    Hosting trends is just as -- gives you a flavor of the hosting
  trends.  We've taken three countries.  And how they're mapping for
  hosting.
    Then as I said earlier, notice and take down is very important to us.
  So we -- we monitor this closely.  And each one of our deliverables is
  to be able to improve this area.  So you can see that we're -- majority
  of the illegal content is being removed within a day.  This gives us
  the trend data.  So content removed in a day is improving.  Which is in
  the target, to try and remove all this data once we see it within a
  day.
    This is very interesting data.  So this is looking at particular
  country, and their ISPs.  And so the data on the left, the ISP on the
  left, has been cooperating closely with law enforcement.  So if you
  look at the 32 percent of their content being removed in a day, 24
  percent within two days.  So you would say that this ISP is cooperating
  with taking down illegal content.
    However, if you then look to the far right, you look at an ISP that
  actually has been notified of illegal content, they still got 57
  percent of that still up and running after five days.  And indeed, 38
  percent is not removed at all.
    So that would be an area for discussion with law enforcement.  Not
  for inhope, but for law enforcement to talk to the ISP why they have
  not removed that content.
    And the main trends that we can look at.  So we can identify
  partners.  So with this, the light green is showing you traffic within
  the domain.  And it dies in July.  But then the light blue, appears --
  what's happened here is the domain name has changed.  So we talked to
  the hotline, and they've identified that -- where the traffic's moved
  to.  And if you look at that on a live issue, what this is showing is
  within two and three month periods, the domain's moved country, they
  also move ISP.  So we can give that trend data to our stakeholders.
    The notice and take down is an area of real importance to us.  And
  it's by working closely with the law enforcement we can improve that.
    So this is a live example that the European hotline that is now
  working much closer with the law enforcement, whereas it was taking six
  days to take the content down, now they're talking much -- on a more
  collaborative basis.  That content was removed within a day.  And that
  is great news.
    And that concludes my presentation.  Thank you.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you very much, Russell.
                (Applause)
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  If anybody would like to point -- or have any
  questions related to his presentation, very quickly if there is
  anything that you want to add or to ask him.
    Year data was very interesting, and particularly the ones that still
  remains up after five days.  And I think when John leads us to the
  discussion, this could --
    >> This can be some of the facts that can be brought over.  Our
  challenges and solutions.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  So do we have any one -- yes, please?
    Please introduce yourself.
    >> My name is Blashmar, an academic from University.
    Just the question on the backwards state categories you mentioned.
  You mentioned access to children.  But adult porn access to children.
  Particularly is upset with adults and --
    >> RUSSELL CHADWICK:  Yes, it is.  There are the hotlines have got
  much broader categories.  And when we research the common categories,
  those were the 13 that we've got.
    I can give you the data offline.  In terms of how we get that, those
  categories.  The majority of the content is see some -- child sexual
  abuse material.  We do track terrorism, but is' not a huge amount.  I
  think some of that hotlines have got 26 categories.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  So our next speaker is Susie Hargreaves from IWF.
  She will start with a video, a very short video, that gives you very
  comprehensively what they're doing.
    (Video).
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Can you hear?
    No?
    So -- okay.  It worked in the morning, right?
    >> SUSIE HARGREAVES:  I'll just talk.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Want to try again?
    Yes, we did, but -- okay.  I'll try again and if you have your head
  set, you can probably put it in.
    (Audio volume inaudible in video).
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  I think we probably revert to hearing from the house
  mics.
    >> RUSSELL CHADWICK:  Thanks very much, I'm delighted to --
    >> SUSIE HARGREAVES:  Thanks very much I'm delighted to be here.  Our
  work has new members of the dynamic coalition.  Thanks for inviting us
  to join.  We work with a lot of people in this room.  Increasingly we
  have a lot more global presence.  I did have videos from the IWF.
  They're on memory sticks but I think every single member of law
  enforcement has taken my memory sticks, so obviously not to give --
  sorry, I can't show that video.  It's up on our website, explains what
  we do.  The IWF is the UK hotline for enforcing criminal content, child
  sexual abuse content anywhere in the world, nonphotographic content in
  the U.K. and seen other content in the UK.  99.9 percent of what we do
  anymore is child sexual abuse content.  So the -- the video kind of
  explains how we work.  And just to go over some of the key areas.
  We're a charity in self regulatory body, entirely independent of law
  enforcement.  And the governments and we're funded by the Internet
  industry.  80 percent of our money comes from industry.  20 percent
  from the EU as we're sort of the UK Internet centre.  National and --
    We're very interested in government's point view because we are self
  regulatory.  We have no powers to enforce the Internet industry removes
  content voluntarily.
    We -- we are one of the most successful hotlines in the world in
  removing content in our own country.  Content in the U.K. is removed in
  less than an hour.  We've also worked very hard internationally so that
  over the last 17 year, we've been able to bring down content that we
  identify from 20 day toss 10 day, which is still ten days.  We're very
  proud of that.  In the U.K. we have an exemplary record.  When we
  started at 18 percent of content is down to less than 1 percent.  U.K.
  is down -- hostile territories to host child sexual abuse content and
  that's because of the partnerships.  We're very fast, quick, and that's
  because the Internet industry cooperates with us 100 percent.
    So I will just quickly talk about some of the trends we see.
    Russell's talked about some of these trends.  So what's the scale of
  child sexual abuse, how many of them are out there the reality is know
  one actually knows.  And then we're going to talk about some numbers.
  We're always quite skeptical about the number, we hear numbers that
  don't particularly hear what we see but we don't see what other people
  see.  So we're not saying we have any definitive date on on this as
  well.  What we can tell you is that the UNODC reports that there are a
  mignon images in sirs change images in circulation.  What our analysts
  see is about nearly all images we see are duplicates.  They're
  recirculated images.  And some might be 10 or 20 years old.  And we see
  roughly -- it's not an absolute figure, but roughly around 1 to 2 new
  children a week.  The importance of that is every time we see a new
  child we can safely say -- every single image is a child that's been
  sexually abused is a crime scene and every single image is unacceptable
  and needs to be removed.  How many times they're back up again.
    Type of content we see in 2012, 81 percent of that content was
  children age 10 and under.  4 percent is under 2.
    That's actually down from the year before.  And 53 percent was of the
  worst kind in the U.K. graded 1 to 5.  53 percent was level 4 and 5.
  Which is the rape and sexual torture of children, mainly involving an
  adult and a child.  In the U.K. the content that we see, we tend to see
  of it as white men abusing white children, predominantly girls,
  obviously increases in number of boys.  And we see an increasing number
  of Asian children as well.  We're starting to see new patterns emerging
  particularly in discussion with other sister hotlines, in South African
  hotlines, starting to see black children being abused by black adults.
  This was our experience as well when we went to talk to law enforcement
  partners in Uganda where we have been doing some work.  We're starting
  to see new patterns emerge.  Obviously one of the issues around the
  Internet penetration developing in developing countries is that we're
  starting to see new areas of child sexual abuse emerge from there.
    Just quickly tell you a little bit about -- Russell talked about
  where the content was hoefded.  So I don't think I can talk
  particularly about that.  One of the things I wanted to talk about was
  the importance of trying to stop people going there in the first place.
  It's our experience from our research that the most likely people to
  stumble across child sexual abuse content are young men aged 18 to 25.
  And we'd like to start them going there in the first place.  We've only
  recently -- I have to say it's slow compare today other country,
  introduced flash pages, so we have a blocking list for all content
  hosted outside of the U.K. and from now anytime anybody tries to access
  a URL that's on our blocking list, we now receive this flash page
  warning telling them about the potential ramifications of what they're
  doing.  This is quite new thing in the U.K.
    Taken us about 10 years to bring in.  We're in the particularly proud
  that this has taken so long.  But it has just come into play.
    The other -- the big issues for us in the UK -- big issues I would
  say within the field are we have current situation is very high profile
  in the United Kingdom.  That followed we had a year of extremely high
  public cases, what we call a Jimmy sable effect, a major permanent in
  the U.K. being exposed as one of the biggest abusers of children of all
  time.  That continued and really peaked during the year with the two
  murders of two young girls and the murder cases have been concurrently
  for their murderers in the U.K.
    And they -- both of them were shown to have images of child sexual
  abuse on their computers.  And they have no previous records or no
  previous link to it.  And then they went out and murdered these two
  children.
    And as a result of that, the first time we caught a link was paid
  between looking at images and actually going out and committing
  absolutely horrific offenses.
    This races a huge outcry in the U.K.
    From the media, from the public and picked up by government at the
  highest level in the Prime Minister has been taking it forward.  To
  give you an example of the extent of the outcry, in July 2012 we did 75
  pieces of media, that was television, radio, news print.  In July of
  2013 we did 2,500.  And we're a tiny little charity based in the U.K.
    So suddenly it's kind of totally gone right up into the highest --
  you know, not just the highest echelons in terms of how but in terms of
  public perception.  It's a really big deal in the U.K. at the moment.
  The scale of the problem is really big.  We might be greater in doing
  it in the U.K. at doing this but we have to tackle it internationally.
  We're concerned about self generated content.  Seen more and more self
  generated content from young people, particularly teenagers.  One of
  the issues for us at the IWF, if we cannot verify their ages it's
  impossible to take action.  That's some scenario we're working on to
  see how we can protect people in the 15 to 18 age group.
    And another big area is obviously peer to peer much we only deal with
  what's out there in the public domain.  But a very big issue is the
  issue of sharing content on peer to peer.  And I've just been given a
  warning.  Sort of talk about the big issues and the overall scale of
  the issue in the U.K.
    And I think that pretty much captured it.  So thank you.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you, Suzie.  I think both of your presentations
  speaks of the need to address this issue.  Global issue.  And that we
  don't have the ability in parts of the world.  And I'm sure John will
  in his session discuss the -- why we are doing this exercise, the one
  that -- what it will lead us to.  I think these are the other aspects
  that the type of abuse in the -- the scale of the problem, and why we
  in the policy-makers needs to pay attention to the problem.
    So thank you very much for sharing the trends and information about
  the reports that you receive.
    With that I pass it on to Linda Sharma.  She's going to present the
  work of the financial coalition and how that's's going to -- the impact
  it has made and some of the ongoing work in relation to fighting child
  sexual abuse materials.  Thank you.
    >> LINDA SHARMA:  Thank you, Anjan.  It's a pleasure to be here.  I'm
  glad I actually follow Russell and Susan in their presentations because
  they gave us an extremely clear overview of what the situation is
  globally on the issue of child -- online sexual exploitation.  I will
  really zero in on just one programme.  That is the commercial site of
  the issue.
    I'm Linda Sharma, I represent the international sector of -- I'm
  based in Singapore and I have a colleague here in the audience with me
  also who's here from the U.S.
    I will highlight one of our programme, the financial coalition
  against child pornography, working towards eradicating online
  commercial child pornography.
    As I said, I don't want to repeat what rus ul and Suzie already said.
  We have seen figures they've presented.  We realise the scope of the
  issue is mret if I.
    Pretty dramatic.  Few statistics coming in here, one from the U.S.
  line, we receive 1.9 million reports in 1998.  And also under the child
  victim identification programme we have huge -- analyzed more than 90
  living images since 2002.  You can well imagine the gravity of the
  issue.  Cyber to Canada, on the commercial side I would like to
  highlight this one statistic here.  Cyber Canada, the Canada reporting
  mechanism, in 2007 to 2008, over a two-year period, reviewed commercial
  ebusinesses online and identified 27 types of payment sis at the
  presents used.  85 percent sold memberships with regard to monthly
  payments ranging from $4 to $490.
    And we all know as statistics put out by the UN, in the June 2010
  globalization crime study.  They suspect that this is -- industry
  generates around 50,000 new images each year and it's probably about
  200 million dollars EU.
    In Asia these are the kind of media head lines we see.  I will zero
  in on a couple of them here.
    Most recently, which has been most concerns to a lot of us here,
  Anjan and I discussed it often.  This case of the Swedish national
  ordering on demand, online child sexual abuse of children based in the
  Philippines.  The payment mechanism used were extremely legitimate
  corporate industry platforms like PayPal, credit cards.  So that's
  where the whole responsibility in the industry comes in on this issue.
    The other one I would like to highlight is a recent study coming out
  of Australia.  Where in the study reveals that it was done in tas
  mania, actually.  They interviewed about 400 students on campus.  And a
  good percentage of them -- the study was found that 1 in 10 people
  believed there was nothing wrong in viewing child pornography, not
  adult pornography.  So these are the young 20-somethings within our
  society today, who because of the exposure of illegal and inappropriate
  content and the availability and accessibility of it on Internet, have
  come to believe that it's the norm.  It's okay to be there and to watch
  it.
    So much for that.  And I'll zero in on the financial coalition.  The
  background to that is it was launched in 2005 coming out 69 scandal in
  the U.S. where a PayPal account was being used to buy, sell, and access
  child pornography.  It was a piece of New York Times investigative
  journalism.  The way the U.S. reacted in a huge outcry.  The financial
  payments industry was called to the mat by the congressional hearings.
  And basically threatened with legislation unless they did something.
    And that's how the financial coalition was set up in collaboration
  with two organizations, the national centre for missing and exploited
  children and the Internet centre.
    The one goal of the coalition is to really disrupt the economics of
  this trade, to really make it unprofitable for people who use this as a
  commercial ebusiness to be able to make money.
    Selling such images.
    As I said, we work with the national centres, our sister
  organisation, the national clearinghouse in the U.S. around any issue
  surrounding child protection.
    And what's unique with the national centre is because of
  congressional mandate, it has law enforcement sitting with them in the
  NGO working with them.  And therefore they have great power toss
  actually make things happen.
    If the financial coalition we work closely with one of the centres of
  the centre, the cyber tip line.  A reporting mechanism where public as
  well as ISPs in industry can report in illegal content.  I will skip
  through this, but because of the fact that -- because of congressional
  pressure as well as congressional mandate, the financial coalition in
  the U.S. is an operational coalition where law enforcement sitting with
  industry actually does test transactions to follow the money where
  these -- to do a test transaction, to understand the business model of
  these ebusinesses, e-commerce merchants.  To follow the money,
  understand the business model and disrupt the economics of it.  I won't
  go into the details of this.  We don't have that much time.
    But I would like to share the referrals that come in to the cyber tip
  line are not only coming in from the U.S.   The cyber tip line takes in
  reports coming in from everywhere.  The figures represented here on the
  screen, that's something I would really like to give a definition of
  what we stand for because otherwise they're open for misinterpretation.
    These reports rfr to -- the content is hosted by -- in the U.S.,
  hosted on servers in the U.S.   These figures represent the number of
  individuals accessing or uploading illegal content, the uses in third
  country that is accessing and using in U.S.-hosted site.  So these are
  figures from all different countries in Asia.  Very often in Asia, when
  I have conversations with governments, they say, no, no, it's not --
  it's a western problem.  And as Suzie pointed out, at this point in
  time the majority of the images that we see are of Caucasian children.
  So Asian government's very comfortably say it's a western problem.  And
  these figures from the cyber tip line very clearly tell you that it's
  an issue, it's a global issue.
    It's -- Asian countries where they have biggest -- what do these
  figures report?
    These are the categories under which the reports come in.  And child
  pornography makes up over 90 percent of the reports that come in.
    Who's reporting?
    Initially it was the public.  More reports were coming in from the
  public.  But increasingly as you see now, industry is stepping up to
  the issue.  And more of the reports are now being -- are coming in from
  ISPs and technology companies and content hosts.
    Who's reporting?
    What's -- again, is very interesting is obviously when cyber tip line
  was set up first, it was -- it's a U.S. hotline.  Most of the reports
  were coming in from the U.S. industry or U.S. public.  Increasingly now
  international reporting overtakes industry and public reporting in the
  U.S.   So it is indeed a global issue.
    So you know, those are the figures coming out of the work of the
  financial coalition.
    In addition to that, the financial coalitions also over the years put
  out three leadership pieces around merchant acquisition and monitoring
  of best practices.  Other best practices around trends, around online
  crime.  We also run a webinar for financial payments industry on child
  pornography.  Keeping child pornography participants out of the payment
  system.  The cyber tip line reports a 50 percent drop in the number of
  unique commercial child pornography websites from 2002 into it.
    The other trend that is very telling is again it's coming out of the
  cyber tip Canada where they -- where they went through a -- the
  monitoring of these emerchants.  We have seen a consistent increase in
  the membership costs for these kind of websites.  Really clearly
  implying that the industry and financial coalition efforts are
  effective in disrupting that.  And therefore it's far more expensive to
  access these sites.
    Who are our members?
    It's a broad swathe of the financial industry.  In the Asia district
  it's slightly more diverse so we have regional enforcement companies as
  well as NGOs.  And in the Asian Pacific I will highlight one of our
  efforts which is the most recent effort.  In just last month in
  September.  Prior to that first three years have really been looking at
  creating a wellness centre level.  But over three years having built up
  a sufficient membership in the Asian Pacific, I held in New Zealand a
  round table specifically around the issue.  We came out of that round
  table and -- I'll backtrack.  Weed 15 law enforcement officers, we had
  nine bankers, five technology and ISP representatives there.  So it was
  a true cross-section of industry, law enforcement and civil society.
  We came out with -- from it with a working group, and I am currently
  working with four banks in New Zealand and they are in agreement with
  the fact and having conversations with law enforcement to really make
  live accounts, payment accounts available to law enforcement to do test
  transactions within the New Zealand domain to track these kinds of
  e-commerce, to understand their business model and then disrupt it.
    And that's -- I can stop at that, really.  Thank you.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you very much, Linda.  Any questions for Binda,
  from the room, or any other panelists we have?
    I don't see any hands there.  You did mention very interesting
  points.  I know I have been following the work of the financial
  coalition.  It's very promising that the industry is coming forward,
  the bapgers are moving forward.
    Maybe it can infuse some of the members here back in this countries,
  how to get these opportunities going.
    And so with that I will flow to John, and to lead -- to lead us to
  the rest of the session today on child abuse images as indicators.
    >> John:  Okay.  Good afternoon.  My name is John Carr.  And I've
  recently been appointed global advisor to -- international, you never
  guess it from my accent, I am in fact British.
    And today we're meeting for the last time as the dynamic coalition.
  In the future we're going to meet as the super dynamic hyper energetic,
  never stop moving coalition.
    And I hope at the end of this presentation you will see why.
    Now, I had a video to show you, but for the reasons we all now know,
  I won't.  What I will do is try to tell you briefly what that video
  said.
    It was an extract from one of our national TV news channels, ITN
  news, that went out on the 28th of May this year.  So not very long
  ago.  And the main person being spoken -- speaking, being interviewed
  in this news clip -- by the way, if anybody wants it, the news clip, if
  you let me know, I can send you a link to drop box -- sorry, sky drive,
  where you can -- where you will be able to -- in fact I have it --
  where you will be able to pick it up.
    Anyway, the person being interviewed in this video clip is called
  Peter Davis.  And he is Britain's top cop when it comes to online child
  protection.  He's the head of seal.  And in the interview what he
  basically acknowledges, that the British police are unable to cope with
  the volume of offenders and the volume of images which they now know
  with a great deal of certainty are actually being circulated within the
  Internet and in the United Kingdom.  And I'll come back to those
  numbers in a second.
    The report of his interview.  There's another video clip, which again
  I would have shown if I could.  But which again I'll send to you if you
  want.  And this video clip is from another news programme that went out
  two weeks later on the beginning of June.  And in that video clip you
  see a man called Nick Moran, who is the head of the child protection
  section, so to speak, of Interpol, the global police agency.
    And in that interview, Nick Moran basically says there is no police
  force in Europe that is on top of this programme.  He was being
  interviewed by Euro news, but he might as well have said the world.
    The truth is that the volumes of images and the numbers of people
  downloading and exchanging them online have outstripped the capacity of
  any police force anywhere in the world to be able to deal with them by
  conventional or traditional policing methods.
    Now, we've known this quite a long time.  People on the inside.
  We've been aware of this fact for ages.
    But never before have such senior police officers gone on the record
  on TV and acknowledged it in public.  And I think both of them deserve
  a great deal of credit for their bravery in doing so.  Because I'm sure
  the reason they didn't previously disclose the true scale of this
  problem was because they didn't want to panic the public or they didn't
  want to, you know -- they didn't want to cause people undue or
  unnecessary anxiety.  And they probably thought that it was -- somehow
  in the public's best interest for them to suppress this information.
    I think suppressing the truth very rarely helps in any debate.  But
  what is absolutely true is that you can't possibly have an adult
  conversation about what you're going to do about a problem unless you
  all agree what the facts of that problem are.
    I think now as a result of the these recent disclosures by Interpol
  on the one hand on and the British police on the other, I think we can
  all now begin to discuss and debate what it is in fact we're going to
  do.  Because even though we've heard about tremendous work being done
  by inhope and the IWF and industry around the world and speak
  specifically about Microsoft later on, whatever it is we've been doing
  up to now, it's not working.  Or it's not working well enough.  We're
  not matching the scale of the problem.
    And we've got a decision to make, if you like, as a -- as a
  community, as a world community, or however you want to put it.
    Either we sit back and accept that this is the new reality, that it's
  completely beyond the capacity of the state, and its police services to
  deal with this problem, or -- and this is certainly the view at
  international takes -- we try to up the ante and try to get more
  attention and resources devoted to trying to deal with it.
    And that's certainly the proposition that I'm going to put forward.
    We have to find new ways to galvanize public opinion around this
  question cht because unless we can -- if we can't find ways to
  galvanize public opinion and get more attention focussed on this
  question, we have no hope of getting governments to increase the
  efforts that they're going to make and increase the resources that
  they're willing to give to the police forces.
    Sorry, I just remembered I said I would give you some numbers, I'm
  now going to do that.  These numbers came out of the U.K. but I have no
  reason to suppose the U.K. is madly different from anywhere else.  Even
  if you took the U.K. as a single stand alone example, I think what
  emerged was alarming.
    This is what happened.  One our children's organizations sent a
  request, an official request, to every police force in gland Wales
  asking the police force in that area to tell them how many child abuse
  images they had seized inned period ended April 2012.  In the time
  scale that we were putting to, only put 5 police forces actually
  replied to the question.
    By the way, they were legally obliged to answer the question because
  it was under our freedom of information Act.
    Five police forces replied.  None of them covered a major urban area.
  They were all predominant forces that covered largely rural areas.
  They had small cities in them, but they didn't -- it didn't include
  London, didn't include Birmingham, Manchester or LEADS.  Covered
  smaller population areas.
    These five police forces nonetheless reported that in that two-year
  period they seized 26 million images in the different actions in which
  they had taken during that period.
    I showed the data that we got to a professional statistician, and he
  looked at the demographics of those five police force areas.  And he
  said, well broadly speaking it's not likely to be very different across
  the whole country because the demographics of those fies police areas
  essentially representative of the population of gland and Wales as a
  whole, and if that's true -- remember you're looking at populations,
  probabilities within populations rather than necessarily level of
  police activity alone.
    If that was true, that would suggest that in excess of 300 million
  images would have been seized by police forces across England and Wales
  as a whole during that two-year period.  That compares with, you know,
  7,000 images that the police knew about in 1995, which was like year
  zero for the Internet.
    Now, just -- 300 million images is a very, very big number, it could
  mean however, that only five guys did it.  Because you don't know
  exactly the volumes of each image -- of images that any individual
  person who's arrested might have downloaded.  But we do have a clue
  about them.  Because also during that interview, what the -- what Peter
  Davis revealed was that the police had been monitoring the exchange of
  child abuse images over a -- peer to peer networks in the United
  Kingdom.  And what he disclosed, again, very bravely, I thought, was
  that the police had identified between 50 and 60,000 individual IP
  addresses within the UK where people had either been downloading or
  exchanging child abuse images.
    These were known child abuse images, of course.
    Now, just let me tell you, 50 to 60,000 people is a hell of a lot of
  people.  In no year -- in no year since records began in Britain -- and
  that's 1998, for these purpose, in no year have the British police
  arrested more than 2,500 people.  What that mean, if you do the math,
  it's quite easy, assuming there were no new crimes ever committed,
  unrelated to child abuse images, the last person that the police
  already know about today would not be arrested until 2032.
    So in other words, again, Peter Davis says this specifically in the
  interview, we cannot arrest them all.  I'd like to, he said, but we're
  never going to be able to do that.
    The British prison system only has places for 91,000 people.  At the
  moment there are 92,000 people in those prisons.  So even if we could
  arrest them all, it's simply impossible to imagine what we would do
  with them and where we would put them.
    The key point is to illustrate, again, the point I was making at the
  opening, whatever we've been doing up to now, it's not working well
  enough.  And we have to find new and better ways of addressing it.
    What ECPAT international wants to do and what we hope one of the
  things that will come out of this is a renewed coalition, a new
  approach where we can all work together to try and find a way to push
  this matter up the political agenda.
    And with the U N's new millennium development goals coming into view,
  people are working on the propositions now, what international very
  much wants to do is to get the UN millennium goals to accept as an
  indicator progress in this space, how measured reduction in the volume
  of images and the number of people involved in that.
    So that means getting hold of hard numbers.  Because you will not get
  a millennium development goal accepted by UN processes or the UN
  machinery unless you can put hard numbers around it.  And we want
  people to work with us as ECPAT international to develop information
  tools that will help convince the UN this is a realistic possibility.
    I'm very happy to say that I've spoken to police officers around the
  world -- because we know it's not always obvious, is it, if people
  start getting numbers about your real level of achievement or work,
  it's always going to be welcome.  What it means in effect that you're
  becoming more -- your actions are being more scrutinized.  I'm happy to
  say in this particular case maybe after a little bit -- the cops get
  the message.
    If we can fot get numbers, if we can't get a better grip on the
  numbers in this space, it's going to become increasingly difficult to
  get governments to put money behind it.  Because if we can't
  demonstrate the -- in some way or another, it will never be perfect,
  but there's no -- as Suzie said, a lot of this activity you can never
  be sure of the true scale of it.  But there are bits of it that we will
  be able to put together through monitoring peer to peer networks,
  through collecting input data about the number of URLs that have been
  reporting, through reports about the number of take-downs being
  achieved.  There are a whole range of sorts of numbers around that if
  we can find a way to bring them together in an intelligent way, we
  think we'll help shape the political agenda for this going forward.
    But it's not -- what we also want the new super dynamic highly
  energized never stop moving coalition also to think about are a range
  of our measures.  Because that thing around the millennium development
  goals and the numbers and so on, that's pretty -- a median to --
  conceptually important but nonetheless it's not going to deliver in the
  very short term.
    There are a number of other things that we want to see being promoted
  more energetically.  One of them is the greater deployment of products
  like mike soph's DNA.  Suzie mentioned and I mentioned the role that
  peer to peer networks are playing.  Most of the stuff that Russell and
  Suzie were talking about earlier are reports that came from websites,
  URL, content that was being found on the Web.  There's very little
  doubt in my mind that the bulk of the activity is shifting away from
  the Web.  The Web will always be important.  We can never take our mind
  off the Web.  Because it is the most user friendly and easiest
  interface to use.
    But there's no doubt at all that big volumes of illegal images of
  child abuse are now shifting into peer to peer networks but also I'm
  sad to say on -- let's talk about using inscription and that kind of
  thing.  Let's come to that piece later.  That's the really, really hard
  stuff.  This bit is doable now.  Through user -- greater deployment of
  products like photo DNA.  Maybe other companies will develop tools
  similar to.
    Any may I don't remember cloud service provider, any major company,
  in my view, that's providing any kind of public storage, whether it's
  free or paid for, should be deploying photo DNA or a product like that.
    Because if they're not doing that, then they're more or less saying
  we don't really care that much about whether people are using the
  services that we're providing to store or exchange or distribute child
  abuse in it.  So very much at the core of this will be an eye on this
  new campaign that we hope will develop -- will be things like that.
  Splash pages were mentioned by Suzie in relation to people trying to
  access URLs with known -- where the address is known to contain illegal
  images.  We're also pressing for in the U.K. and international also
  pressing for more, wider basis, is for the search engine companies to
  get involved.  It's all very well if a guy is trying to access the --
  we don't think the search engine companies should be an easy route for
  people to find a lot of child abuse, that type material.  And we --
  we're not -- we don't -- we don't know anything officially yet, but I'm
  expecting good news on that front from several search engine companies
  or at least the two most important ones in the near future.
    And so the other -- actually, we -- if I keep talking -- and I
  certainly could, as you know -- there won't be any time for discussion.
    So one other project that we want the new super dynamic, highly
  energized never stop moving coalition also to join ECPAT international
  in is developing a lexicon and a lexicon actually -- that's -- I'm
  sorry, I shouldn't use posh words, should I?
    A dictionary, of terms that are used in child abuse.  One of the
  wonderful things about ECPAT international, one of the reasons I'm
  really happy that I'm going to be working with them much more closely
  is that they are a global network.  These guys have got feet on the
  ground.  And I'm going to get this number wrong.  75 countries?  Sorry?
    That's it.  75 countries, 82-member organisations.  That's a great
  joy.
    The down side of that is trying to communicate fairly basic ideas in
  the way that doesn't cause confusion.
    I mean, you know, we all know the arguments around child abuse
  imimagines, child sex abuse material, child pornography, bullying,
  there's a whole range of terms that some of us use constantly that
  actually don't translate into some languages at all.  The concept is
  very difficult one to express.  And it's a constant sort of barrier and
  it always getting in the way of some of the discussions that we all are
  trying to have.
    Another of the projects that we're going to try and do and your
  involvement or engagement with that will be very welcome -- not clear
  how we're going to dwo do t but we're going to give it an a go, develop
  a lexicon we can publish.  Anywhere in the world people want to engage
  in the debate, there will be at one authority, reference point to look
  to, to get some clarity about some of the concepts that we're going to
  be using.
    So there are a number of the concrete ideas that ECPAT international
  wants to propose.  We're not saying -- we're not asking for a vote or
  for anybody to sort of start saying yes or no now.  Think about it.
  We're going to be in touch with you all in one way or another.
    And we think it's a great way to go.
    And next year when we meet, you'll be selling tickets in the hall for
  people to get in.  And we'll have to insist on the plenary room anyway
  because that's the way it's going to be from now on, isn't it, Anjan?
    Okay.  Thanks.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you so very much, John.  And I think that was
  very informative and giving us new thoughts to explore and move forward
  with.
    And I thank you for that.
    What we would like to do now is, you know, if anyone around the room
  has any comment to this idea, the proposition that we have, I certainly
  know that, you know, Jacqueline and Kim would be definitely interested
  in, you know -- you are working on the educational awareness bit.  But
  in terms of the photo DNA that John mentioned, it's a technology
  contribution to this effort.
    So any ideas that you as a member of the coalition can put forward to
  advance this in your own city, in the way that you are linked to the
  work, would be very much welcome.
    And any format that you can propose to us that works in terms of
  exchange, in terms of maybe an online platform, maybe setting up a
  format structure that, you know, we don't have to wait until the next
  year's IGF to come and say, okay, this is what we thought.  We got in
  the proposition last year.
    I think what we can all agree on is if you think this is really a
  good idea, if this is something that we need to do, to express your
  thoughts and opinion either now or, you know, offline.  So we really
  would value your engagement.  And we can only do it collectively.  We
  need the support of all the members here.  So it's just an appeal.
    And as John mentioned, next year we probably would have a way to --
  even before we come, we can identify other issues that we need to plug
  into this.
    One of the things that we always struggle is how do we make our voice
  within this room visible to the overall participants here at the forum.
  Right?
    We know we are being transcribed.  This will appear in the
  publication.  Probably six months later.  And probably point 01 percent
  of the participants will have a chance to read it.
    So we do really want to make a difference through this coalition.
  The reason why you are here, you are all very, very prominent members
  of the -- you know, of the coalition.  And you are very, very prominent
  members of the world in terms of the work that you do.
    So the urge here is to how do we make the participation count.  And
  to make a difference, you know?
    And that's an appeal from us as the chair and so -- I see a hand.
  Prfrjs ita, if you can share your thoughts.
    >> Prita:  We are making the IT initiative page, as a platform for
  sharing information.  And also sharing tools, of course.  So we would
  be happy to make that available to the dynamic coalition and the core
  partners.
    Thanks.  Z beau.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you for that kind offer.  And we will explore
  much these are the kind of contributions each member can bring and
  offer, both in the terms of the experience, in terms of the resources.
  Even when we go back, how do we take this issue to our own governments,
  for example?
    Because it has to be replicated, it has to be reflected in the work
  that we do.
    So I think we had -- yes, Judith?
    >> Judith:  I just wanted to pick up that point regards how do we
  convince our local governments, our national governments to put more
  resources into the work of law enforcement?
    I think that's also works, to have a little bit of exchange about
  that topic much but that maybe could not take place on an online
  platform.  It must be more like a personal chat to each other.  Because
  I think it's not the problem that the government understands that there
  are more resources needed for law enforcement, but once they say
  officially there are more resources needed, that would be admitting
  that there have been not enough resources put into law enforcement in
  the first time.  And that could not be done in the public or
  officially.
    So it needs a little bit of diplomatic exchange maybe and that could
  also be point of an exchange to learn about the approach, strategies
  that have been used in other countries.  Bose.
    >> John Carr:  Certainly a very important strategy for us was getting
  the police to tell us the truth.  Without the truth you're hobbled.  We
  have a legal system.  I think -- is there any country here that doesn't
  have an official system for requiring public authorities to disclose
  information?
    We call it the freedom of information provision.
    So if the police -- if you don't know the truth about what's going on
  in your country, it's very hard to go to the government, you know, and
  just say, hey, we need more.
    Everybody -- anybody and anybody can say that.  Otherwise you need to
  develop your resources inside the police service to get the information
  out.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Just to respond to John, I'm not many -- not many
  countries in the developing region has this information act that forces
  ultimately them to release the information to the public.  But
  definitely way to go.  Yes, Judith did say -- any questions?
    Thank you, John.
    >> Thank you Anjan and thank you all the panel gists for some great
  information which is definitely compliming some of the efforts we have
  underway at Microsoft.  Just a few weeks ago we had a visit from COPP,
  the child exploitation centre in the U.K. I would like to add a couple
  statics to the record to what John said.  In addition to the 50,000
  U.K. based individuals currently thought to be involved in sharing
  indecent images of children, they also talked about 4 million indecent
  images found in the collection of just one offender in 2002.  And they
  also talked about 424 child victims in a single case earlier this year.
    So that just goes to underscore the level of the problem at that
  we're talking about here.
    What I can offer from Microsoft is we have, as John mentioned, our
  photo DNA technology.  We have a one-pager, what we call, available
  online for those who are not familiar with the technology and how you
  can evangelize it and hopefully use it within your countries, within
  various organizations.  If you would like that link, we can certainly
  provide it.
    I'm also saying that we are always looking for new applications and
  ways to extend and advance the photo DNA technologies much so please
  share with us any ideas you might have in that regard.  I can speak for
  my colleagues in the digital crimes unit who own that technology, are
  responsible for that technology.
    And finally from a measurement perspective, this is something I would
  like to put out to all of you on 9 panel.  We have something that Kim
  and I directly control called the Microsoft computing safety index.
  And it's a ( gauge of consumer online habits and practices at the
  technical level, at something beyond the technical level, and then at
  something at the behavioral and sort of information level.
    We do this survey every year in 20 countries.  And since we control
  that directly, we're wondering if there's any particular question or
  item that we could ask people on a regular basis about child
  protection.  We would love to get that in there so we can track and
  measure these statistics on an annual basis.  So please think about
  that and let us -- let us know what we might be able to inject
  directly.  Thank you.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you very much, Jacqueline.  I think that's very
  interesting and we will definitely be looking at that.
    Yes?
    >> John Carr:  A quick point about countries that don't have freedom
  of information.  There are ways of getting information other than that.
  But here's the point.  If you walk around this conference, you see
  everywhere people talking about the next billion Internet users.
  They're going to be primarily in the developing world.  So -- and all
  of the evidence suggests that the problems that we've seen in the west
  and in the northern hemisphere and so on will start to occur in those
  countries as Broadband access begins to take up.
    The potential for it to do harm is obviously greater in countries
  where the infrastructure available to law enforcement in terms of --
  and the infrastructure in terms of social services and the education
  and awareness aspects of this is just a huge, hugely different.  And
  therefore the potential for harm is that much greater.
    So one possible way, if we can establish some numbers and some
  metrics on a global level at the UN and whereas international
  institutions accept it broadly accurate, that's going to help in any of
  the other countries where they haven't got concrete information from
  their own national police services.
    >>
    >> I absolutely agree with you, John.  In all my conversations in the
  Asian region, the extent of the issue in our country, and I have no
  data.  (Linda Sharma? )
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Is there any question from the floor, any more
  question from the floor?
    Okay.  Yes, I would -- pass the floor to Suzie for her comments,
  please.
    >> SUSIE HARGREAVES:  In relation to supporting and resourcing the
  police, I think one of the -- slightly worrying things that's coming
  out now, I think in the U.K. is that there seems to be -- every problem
  seems to be why isn't an industry paying for it?
    Every single time you get politician, or you know looking at the
  issue, they say, wel, industry should be giving more.  Microsoft has
  money and Facebook and all the rest p and actually it's really
  important to be clear about what is police business and what isn't
  police business.  And what the police -- what should be funded properly
  directly from government and what shouldn't.  And I think that's
  becoming a bit of a worrying trend in the U.K.
    John might...
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  That's a very relevant comment, Suzie.
    I think with that we have closed right on time.  And thank you all
  for your participation.
    We look forward to staying engaged.  Bindu has a closing comment.
    >> Bindu:  I wanted to highlight one thing.  John said let's not talk
  about the dark side.  If I can skip back about three or four slides --
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Just -- can I intervene?
    What he said was -- I mean just to translate --
    >> Bindu:  On the peer to peer exchange.  And not talking about drop
  box.  The Asian Pacific coalition -- that's -- thank, John.  In last
  year I ran a technology challenges work stream within the coalition in
  Asia.  We had five industry partners work with us.  And we've just in
  last two weeks put out a best practices to help file sharing and file
  hosting companies fight of the distribution of child exploitation
  content.  So we really tried to put together -- it's a short 10-page
  document, just to put together industry thoughts around how can we deal
  with this issue?
    So I just wanted to talk about it.  It is a first -- it's a start.
  So it is out there.  And it's available on our website.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thanks very much, Bindu.  I think we did what John
  alluded to, is that we do cover state by state.  And first things
  first.  But we do know that these are emerging issues that we do neat
  to get into.  And thanks for sharing that information.
    >> Bindu.  I just want to say that we have taken a stab at it.
  That's a start.
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  With that we close the session and thank you very
  much all for your participation.
                (Applause)
    >> ANJAN BOSE:  Thank you.
    Before you all leave, I just, you know, want to acknowledge the
  presence of -- Jeneta Wata, are our deputy director for programme, who
  probably you have already met individually.  But just wanted to
  acknowledge here presence today.  As the -- you know, the manager from
  ECPAT international.  All the discussions that we are having here will
  actually help us to formulate our own programmes and strategyize it.
  Thank you for coming, Jeneta, and spending your time with us.  Thank
  you.
    

