BALI TIME Capacity Building Roundtable Forum 




EIGHT INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM BALI BUILDING BRIDGES  ENHANCING MULTISTAKEHOLDER COOPERATION FOR GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
OCTOBER 26, 2013
10:30 BALI TIME
Capacity Building Roundtable Forum
 

The following is the output of the real-time captioning taken during the Eigth Meeting of the IGF, in Bali, Indonesia. Although it is largely accurate, in some cases it may be incomplete or inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to understanding the proceedings at the session, but should not be treated as an authoritative record.

>> MODERATOR: I'll ask you all to use the microphone.  So, for the records, I'm glad we have at least a small number, and the initial idea of this roundtable basically was kettled initially for day zero of IGF.  We said, okay, let's do this at the end to sum up the experience and the track as well.
Also, to try to get all of us to discuss more about this.  Now I have been discussing with some of you, I think this format is much more convenient.  We asked for a roundtable and the idea was to be a roundtable without any specific  rather a meeting rather than a panel or workshop to exchange views. 
One thing, I got the impression, maybe it is a question for all of you, it is that listening to the speeches at the beginning of the IGF, the high level ones, the opening, so on, I think I have heard capacity building, capacity building, capacity building dozens of times from everyone, governments, businesses.  I didn't get the impression  at one point I even prepared a reactional statement and I just didn't have time to get  didn't have time to respond to that in a panel.  That none of them really realizes how complex it is, it is not a matter of bringing a couple of people to the IGF or providing a short training to someone, but it is a process, it costs, it needs resources, it needs experience, so on. 
There is a number of different layers of capacity building.  Maybe one idea might be to come up with some kind of  first, the transcripts, where we can really comment on this, which will stay on record, and come up with some kind of a conclusion out of this meeting here, even an invitational for all those with capacity building to serious consider that.  It includes funding, usually we don't talk about funding, funding is something we don't want to talk about.  It is very important.
At the end, maybe come away with  I don't know  a conclusion of the workshop, which can go into the takeaways of the IGF that we think that this should really be taken care of.  There's a lot of  not really a lot, but there is a number of institutions obviously doing this for a long time, experience, and rather than reinventing the wheel, talking about a bumper sticker that we need capacity building to really get the folks to help us, that's  that was my idea.  Of course, we share among ourselves who does what, what are the needs in different regions, I really love to see the wheels around the world, that's great.  From different organizations. 
So, that's my idea.  I have a couple of agenda points which I shared before the IGF, but maybe starting with this channel, thoughts on what do you think  whether this is really about the stakeholder talking about capacity building, how do we influence that?
Anyone, I mean, we have at least one more  one more mike but it is okay.  We have two of these.  Anyone that wants to comment? 
>> Thank you very much.  It is the chair of the AtLarge Advisory Committee.  I can't speak on behalf of the AtLarge Advisory Committee, otherwise I would have to punt it over to the community and wait 21 days before answering you, I don't think we have the time to wait for that.
I'll share my personal experience as the atlarge community has 160 structures around the world.  It is a wideranging community that spans the world with very wide range of knowledge.  Some structures and some regions being knowledgeable about issues and some being much less knowledgeable about issues.  Until recently in ICANN, it wasn't so recognized, it was a case of well, you need to do capacity building just like what's said over here, everybody agrees, capacity building needs to be done, multistakeholder systems, they need to take place and to be implemented, but there was actually no allocation of resources to it.  That's extremely difficult.  You cannot make a cake with no ingredients. 
In that case, we had even less than no ingredients.  The regions, it was really up to the regions to perform capacity building locally using their own resources and I don't think it was particularly fair for them to bear the full load of being able to bring the region, bring the local stakeholders to a level at which they could take meaningful part in the global conversations and the global discussions and decisions being made when they were getting absolutely nothing in return.
As you well know, this is not just a matter of money but a matter of time.  You cannot teach someone, a complete book on Internet Governance in 24 hours.  At the same time, capacity building is not only teaching people out of books, it is actually getting them involved.
I often make the analogy you can't teach someone how to swim out of a back or how to cycle out of a book.  You may read the book, you will still drown.  Cycling, swimming, being in a community, working in the process that takes place, you will learn a Heck of a lot more than just reading about it.  Capacity building comes up in these two different ways.  It is about enabling the end user, enabling people and being able to take part in those processes.  Enabling people requires travel, requires facetoface meetings, requires a lot more than just having an online course or having a book being sent by post to people.
It requires mentoring, it is a  it is a number of things that have to take place.  The capacity, it is understood, people love to use them, it makes people shine, look good.  Yes, I support capacity building, we have to enable everybody, power to the people, the whole thing.  In practice, I have not seen organizations take that as seriously as they should have.  Organizations by that, I mean not just Civil Society or organizations like ICANN, I mean companies that benefit from the current Internet multistakeholders system, the vast majority don't even think about the fact this they have to they out, that this runs in a multistakeholders way and you need to have stakeholders that know what they're talking about if they're not to be replaced by another system that may be multilateralism and therefore may involve just a certain level of stakeholders which in the majority of cases would be governments.  Knowing the fact that the Internet runs on ideas and the fact that it is really down to the edges to make the  build the future of the net. 
It really runs counterproductive to not actually enable people and not have any capacity building taking place.  That's my feedback on this. 
I see change at the moment.  You know, all is not lost.  There are several initiatives that are starting.  I just hope it is not too little too late.  We really need to have a wakeup call on that.  Everybody needs to have that wakeup call.  Maybe it can start here and we can bring the message to those with the deep pockets.  Otherwise, we're not going to get very far, we'll just light a little fire.
You know, when you do capacity building in a region  we have done local capacity building in our different regions and large organizations  it is interesting, out of  let's say, I'm taking sort of open numbers, but out of 30 people you may get only a subset, maybe six or five people that will actually pursue  if you do once in a while capacity building you may get six, seven people that will actually benefit greatly from it, that will get into it.
You need to do it again and actually continue doing it as an ongoing measure, not just a oneoff.  Accompany people in their trip so as to be able to have a higher yield of success and having more people involved.
Don't want to monopolize but that's the view that I have from my part of the operational multistakeholders model, one that has to come up with statements and with work that effects millions, should I say billions of Internet users worldwide. 
>> Thank you.  Good morning.  I'm from Nigeria. 
My own suggestion goes this way, national governments should be involved.  I have a challenge in Nigeria, they say  an example, we have many that don't understand what is government, Governance and don't have capacity to use the ICT platform.  The system is unproductive.  Making this more tough, expensive.  Why?  We have the interface, the development partners, they insist transparency, accountability, the executive council, it is only at the  everybody has this sent to you via email, you use the laptop, iPad to access information and transaction and the government insists on that. 
I have got to know about the profile vision, the profile vision gives me scholarship to do two classes, policy, I paid  they also give me partial scholarship.  With this, I had to save, sponsor myself through this IGF.  Now, if people get trained, how do we followup and extend the training to others?  It should be very paramount.  You can bring people to train, train the trainer, they go back, they do nothing.  Look, there should be a system whereby after training somebody you should followup on how many have you trained?  When you do followup, those persons that have been trained also have emails so you contact them to get feedbacks from them. 
I did a training for some medical students in a school, I had to forward the information that was trained to another organization, at the  just send this to them, hey, how are you benefiting from the training you got?  It is cool today, it is a benefit, you can see that.  Without even my knowledge.  But one of those, they called me, hey, you did us a great deed.  It is a gift.
Thank you. 
>> Hello.  I'm Naila Harper from  I'm Internet Society.  I'm senior manager of next generation of leaders which is the Internet Society's program that's focused on developing young professionals between ages of 20 and 40.
In terms of capacity building we recognize that capacity building definitely aligning to enhancing outcomes in regions as well as internationally.  We have taken a number of different steps to ensure we can achieve some of these outcomes as well. 
For a number of years now we have been delivering our fellowship program, so there is the fellowship, the IGF fellowship, the ambassadors, in 2013 we have moved to public policy guests to the IETF to bridge out a bit where there is a lot of public policy individuals who don't have a good understanding of what it entails to be involved in an open Internet standards development.  We have been sending in regulators as well, just to bridge those gaps as well.
Another step that we have taken this year, as well, we have developed our own learning management system.  It is called in forum.  Basically the approach we have taken is that since 2009 we have been delivering our online learning program.  That's a sixmonth certification course that takes the learners through a full length and breadth in terms of the Internet Governance, the history of the Internet, technical standards, regulatory framework, development.  By developing our own Internet, learning management system, we have gone to a point where we want to move forward from just our learning format and also move the base so that we can grow.  We basically can only reach about 150 persons a year but we believe if self-based we could reach hundreds as well as thousands.  In terms of the learning system, we're working  we have a number of partners and subject matter experts both internally as well as in other organizations to develop an online library of assets that we can actually surface on the learning management system.  This is in addition to our learning course.  We have assets on managing online identity, we have assets on cyber security, spam we have been developing, we have partnered with the University of Virginia tech to develop an open Internet standards, online courses as well to get more University students and the professors involved in the work of the ITEF.  The overarching goal is to develop a community of learning, not just us operating in our own  also partnering in the organizations to have this type of learning to allow the voices and the dialogue and the more comp tent processes as well.  That's basically it for me. 
>> Hello.  I'm from the consulate of India.  I would like to share my experiences with the capacity building program we run for the police officers.
The kind of program we carry, it is police officers, they understand, comprehend new types of crimes, this is set up by the IT companies in India.  What we have done, we have set up labs around eight different police stations in India.  We talk to the people there.  For the last five years, we have had more than 30,000 police officers in different levels of the program.  We have them doing the programs and then the police officers, what we try to do, we create the structure there, we have people do the training, add structural content for the program and establish content for the program.  We're published now at different levels, and we harmonize the training across India.
That's what we're doing in India.  If you look at the scale for this type of training, we have a 40 million police force that needs to be trained, one portion of the police force that needs to be trained.  So, we have the five, six years of training for the police officers, this needs to be scaled up, we have to scale this up in India.  The scaling up requires you to have that funding.  So, now we're approaching the government with what kind of operating experiences we have, the funding mechanism that we're able to build up and the experience and technical skill that we're able to deliver out that.  We're now operating to the government, asking them to scale up to the national level.  We want every police officer to have training for the cybercrime program and the people that are training the police officers, this is a big program, funding is a challenge for these kinds of big level programs over India.  That's what they experience, that we have gone through.
In doing so, what we have learned basically is you need to create some kind of a physical infrastructure to have the consistent program there.  You have to standardize content, you have to have a professional delivering the program there.  They should be  there should be consistency of skills and really importantly, the significant amount of executive person is required to run this program as a program approach.  This kind of experience, that we're able to establish that, we hope that another one, two years, we'll be able to scale up to a level where each state has this and the government is thinking what to dedicate for the program.  This kind of thing going on in the country, that's what's going on. 
>> Good morning to everybody. 
I'm Nazerel, I'm from Brazilian government.  I'm a member of the steering committee of the Internet. 
We're trying to build  build a model among the stakeholders to get all the views, different perspectives, the private sector, Civil Society and so, the environment and Universities.  To find a way to solve our challenges that are huge because our country is very  has great area and the prices, they're not good for instance and also other inequalities that a country like ours have about many things related to it.  So, we're trying to make this a space to discuss and to propose some way to have funds, to have regulations and it is a very  it's a  it's a process we learn with it every day.  I think all of the other capacities in the country, like the people, the organizations that fight for additional inclusion, things like this, they have a voice in this model and we are all the time trying not  not that we had it right yet  to let our Congressmen aware about the importance, the issues we have.  That we are discussing. 
I think it is our main reflection about capacity building and I think that my other colleagues are also  the Nigeria guy  I think it is something we have to learn, we are together, our region, Latin America and we are partners in the world in trying to learn more and to improve our democracy.
Thank you. 
>> Do you think I should say something?
I think that from my perspective, I  Maureen hill yard from the Pacific. 
One of the things that really got me on the road of doing the work that I'm doing at the moment was the initiation that I got into Internet Governance through DIPLO.  I think that that really  for anyone who is going to be doing anything in the area of development, that training program, the Internet Governance, it is the main stay of it.  It really set me on a path of my way here.
I went to my first IGF in 2008 with DIPLO, it was the most amazing experience.  From that, in 2008, I actually ran my first Inet in the Congo islands using that whole Internet Governance thing.  We actually brought that in, and from there I got to be the board chair, just a natural progression.  I don't know.
A thing too, it is  you know, when you're doing capacity building funding goes with it.  I was extremely lucky when I did my Internet Governance program with them, it was funding, there was funding available.  Whenever we try to do anything, capacity building wise across  in my Internet society where there are 22 countries in the region that we cover we try to provide training, Internet Governance and technical training in our Internet Pac, which is difficult.  We try to hold it in a different country every year to try to get spread.  The funding for  the funding for this has to be  we get funding from the event funding, of course, but what we do, we say that  we ask the government that is actually going to host the event to take on some responsibility otherwise we don't  there is no way we could fund it every year to actually get a big venue, to be able to transport people from all over the different countries to a particular site.  So, I mean, I know the difficulties of capacity building, this is where we're now having  I come in, I'm looking at the ICANN model and similarly with the ISOC trying to look at online ways of providing that model from within and perhaps it mirrors a lot of the stuff that DIPLO actually does.  In order for them to understand development of the Internet within, you know, developing countries, especially the Pacific, there's a real lack of understanding and this is not just with the user group, we're talking the decision makers.  So, this is  I'm really pushing that I thought and can get into the decisionmaking level.  I think that  you know, you had hit that experience of working even with the regulators at that stage and it was really important getting to that level and hopefully regulators have put into the Upper level but in the islands, we still don't have a regulator and that's, you know   
>> The lack of understanding from decision makers is not solely restricted to the developing countries.  Capacity building is seriously needed with the decision makers in Europe and elsewhere so, yeah.  I don't think it is a developing country thing, it is everywhere and all across the board from presidency to parliament to decision makers in Brussels, et cetera, et cetera, it is sometimes you just pull your hair out, think where did these people come from and they don't even know where the Internet is, I wonder if they know how to use a mouse  they probably do now.  I hope I'll be able to get back to Brussels at some point. 
>> A quick point about funding, in terms of the resources to deliver online learning as well as some of our fellowship programs, it is not all selffunding, a lot of the funding comes from organizational partners or industry partners, the private sector, people with a vested interest in open and accessible with the Internet.  Also from a resource perspective we also draw on our partnerships in terms of other fivestar organization, our academia, we also draw on our alumni because a number are from the learning program, they're subject matter experts in their own right.  We even leverage their expertise in terms of supporting on the groundtype activities whether in Africa, the Asia Pacific or South America.  There is a number of ways to pull our resources that's not necessarily limited to the national resources. 
>> Thank you.  I might summarize it, but before, I wanted to check if anyone else who’s not spoken yet 
>> Thank you.  I'm sorry to be late.  I was in another session. 
I crossed someone  yes.  Excuse me.  I'm from Tunisia. 
So, speaking about capacity building, I think that the need of capacity building is for everyone.  At all levels.  I learned from the first phase of this, I had a big disagreement with all stakeholders of the north, they all think that bridging the digital gap, the most important element to bridge this gap is the infrastructure.  I tried to explain that if you have money, or if those countries are giving money, they can build infrastructure in one year, two years. 
Even if they have this infrastructure, if people don't know how to use a computer it may not be useful.  So, to build the infrastructure it needs some short time but to build capacity, it will need  perhaps a generation.  We had better go on capacity building before any other thing to bridge the digital divide.
Thank you. 
>> I'm Andrew Mack.  I'm based in Washington.  A member of the BC but we work extensively with the emerging markets, Africa, Latin America, a bit of south Asia these days. 
I'm also frighteningly a former World Bank employee, that's how I know a lot of Indonesia, I came here many years ago with the bank.  Frighteningly, the term capacity building is probably mentioned in every third world in a World Bank report, right.  For me, it has lost a lot of meaning and so what I usually do, I think about capacity for what?  If you look at it, let's talk about Africa where we work a lot.  You have capacity on so many levels, you have capacity of users which is incredibly important especially as all of these new GTLBs are coming, all of the new functions and the risk, compromising of digital data, phishing, farming, everything, you have the capacity among the government officials, most officials in most countries are not  are not chosen because of their technical capacities, they're chosen because they know the president and because they know someone of important.  That's not just in the south but they're not there because of the political thoughts, we have conversations frequently with people that really only kind of vaguely understand. 
You got capacity of the middle level who are oftentimes in government for two years, then they shoot out to Canada where they work for oracle, whatever it is, that's typical, that experience. 
My experience though is that it is something that has to be a part of our every day.  Almost by calling it capacity building we cheapen it because we say this is something that  it is like exercise.  If you  you can't say I have to go and have an exercise project, exercise has to be a part of your life on an ongoing basis in part because you need it for your health and your body changes overtime and this v changes overtime.  I see it as an area for an awful lot of improvement and part of that is an improvement in the way that we think of it. 
My two cents. 
>> Thank you.  You want to add something?  Not for the moment. 
>> I'm Angelic, I'm a DIPLO fellow, I benefited from the course and it also led to me presenting my government a policy proposal on Internet Governance which up till now is in a drawer somewhere I think.  As was said here, already, it is like a lack of understanding and sometimes a few to acknowledge that there is a lack of understanding and the decision makers and then there's a lack of understanding in the users which brings about fear for new things if you tell them you can do the chicken way or you can do this researching that way they feel like, yeah, but people will probably know what I'm doing because they don't understand how to protect themselves, what's allowed, what's in the allowed.
I think if  I have to agree with what was just said by  I forgot your name  Andrew.
It is in how we think about it, it is a daily thing, it is not just when you run the course six weeks and you're done with t it works every day.  I can see it in my office after I did my course at DIPLO, I would be the person that they would run to when they had a question.  I share kind of the course materials but a lot of people are lazy to read through it, they just come to you, explain to me how this works.  When you explain to them, then they  then one step further.  You know, they understand better.  So, that's what my role became, I became the expert while I'm not the expert.  It is he have day things.  Every day there would be someone at my desk asking some kind of advice on how to deal with this or deal with that. 
So, I think it is a daily thing.  It is something that you as a person just have to be involved with but also make people aware of every day.  Not just keep it for yourself, but share every opportunity you get in every podium, state you have available, share the possibilities, you know, want way to work with Internet, the way you grow from it, you know, what it did for you.  Then I hope that our governments, as I see now, we have Egovernment but it is not interactive, it is just a page you read, you cannot write thing.  It is just a page that comes out.  So, we're in the early stages I think, we have to keep pushing, we have to keep talking about it.  We have to keep sharing. 
>> A last point from me, I'm also a DIPLO foundation and that course has been integral of extreme powers for preparing me for my work in Internet Governance and development. 
>> Before you said you're a DIPLO fellow, I also am a DIPLO fellow.
>> I'm from Argentina, I'm a member here.  I'm with ISOP, and the DIPLO foundation, of course. 
Just some points related with comments made previously.  I like the point about the capacity building process from locals and also I think the capacity, the group, the practical information on how to participate in different places like Ishare and Icom for example.  Some people go to the meetings and do you know how different it is in different places related to their interest and I think that that's my point for now.
>> MODERATOR: Thank you.  Anyone want to add just a short note and a bit about DIPLO, maybe a few people don't know about it.  Very, very briefly and to remind.  Sometimes I get the impression when we're around the IGFs that we're a sector.  It is a funny thing, I think we should be quite clear with others, whoever of us, the DIPLO, who does the programs and bring people to the IGFs, whatever, that usually people say, well, these are DIPLO people, no, they're alumni, fellows, they're not behaving or talking about ISOP or that DIPLO perspective, this is the alumni on their own capacity at the IGF and that's important, the fact that we bring people to the IGF doesn't mean that they represent us necessarily, right?
What I wanted to say, okay, you know, most of you, about DIPLO, in two short sentences, our focus is on policy and diplomacy Governance and technology, these interplay and support what we mentioned at the beginning about a complexity of the process.  What we understand as a capacitybuilding process is definitely not just a training, a single training but it has to be whether it is online or the capacity, it is a blended combination where people can meet and interact online but then bring them to the process somewhere that means that they can have a meaningful participation and then keep communicating with them keeping the community around which is also important to have the community around.  Keep it in a way in a multistakeholder process if you can, keep the multistakeholder composition of the participants. 
One thing we noted, it is relevant when we talked about targets.  When you  you can do a lot of things on your own as capacity.  Then you can achieve a lot, write great papers but nobody knows you have the capacity.  What we see, I see as a pyramid, on the top we have the decision makers, on the middle we have people, practitioners with the policymakers and policy making, then the bottom, we have people that are effectively implementing all of that.  Unless all of these layers know they have educated people in the other players it doesn't help.  The top of the government doesn't know they have educated people on the bottom to ask when there is a security problem, they don't know who to call, they know there is somebody to call, it doesn't make sense.  Also, if you know so much but the government doesn't know, so on.  So, this kind of propagating throughout the structure in countries is very important. 
These were my notes.
I want to  try to summarize a couple of aspects we covered. 
One is, we started, and we have mapped some, talked about some, that I catched, but please add to that capacity building, which is facetoface, online training, a lot of mentoring, training the trainers, the community building, fellowships in putting people in the process, so at least that  I don't know if I missed anything, but please add.
We had a question of who are the targets?  I think basically all different institutions might cover different targets.  Target groups.
We mentioned capacity of the users, awareness, whatever you put it, of the law enforcement agencies, decision makers, community, local authorities, academia, entrepreneurs, authorities national or even global, international organizations, diplomats.  I don't know if I missed anything.
So, I think we should clearly outline different target groups that capacity building should be for and those are different types of programs.  Different topics that we  not topics but the coverage of focus of capacity building that you mentioned, policy, practice, organizational aspects or involvement like you want to know more about ICANN to be involved in it, you want to know more about diplomacy to be involved in the political process, technical capacity building, building the IPs, capacity, regulator, I had a comment went we talked about the capacity building, he said now after the panel, I figured out that you were talking about capacity building from the human perspective.  All the time I was thinking of the antenna infrastructure, building the capacity of the network, we have to distinguish that and that's also important in this. 
Lastly, we talked about funding, what I could map here, or where the funding comes from, the governments, which is I think all of these, the ISTAR organizations, the technical community in that sense, private sector, these are probably  local communities to some extent but I didn't know to which extent the funding comes from the local communities.  These are things that I mapped that we covered.  I wanted to suggest that we try to move to the second part which is how do we sync our and other efforts within the IGF for the next period?  An interesting initiative came from a previous consultation, it is a pity that  there was a question on what exists out of the capacity building initiatives within the IGF or among ourselves.  He provided a simple kind of sheet, a table where all of us could fit in the name, type of the program, so on.  It was too simple, we may extend it, maybe we tried to map and try to share as much as we can through our contacts to get as much as possible of who’s doing what. 
Based on these things, like what are your targets?  What are the topics or the focus that you do?  What are the topics that you cover?  What other methods do you use?  What is the geographical coverage, so on.
We tried to have the single place for anyone to come in, I'm interested on community training in India on policy issues related to this and who does it?  What are the options, differences, so on?  It is one thing for the people to be able to search if they need and the benefit of that, I think it is becoming very much relevant in the context of what we spoke about with lack of funding and the interest of the big guys besides the small talk about capacity or big talk about capacity building but no steps, it is showing the results of what's been done thus far by all of us in mapping and how we can share the results of the work, whether it is the names of the people, community.  I don't know.  Let's think about how we can show the impact, say, listen, folks, we have been doing that, we can't continue if you don't devote to that, provide funding, provide support. 
That's what I wanted to hear about maybe from you.  What do you think how we can improve maybe these steps or any other let's say for 2014?  Between the two IGFs what, do we do next?  An idea is the database, the other, showing the impact of the IGF or the capacity.  The third, probably showing lack of finances.  Folks, there is no finances, it is very limited. 
I remember a couple of years ago, we kept bringing people to the IGF after going through the process of education.  We had 20 fellows around the IGFs, there were a lot of funds available, basically from the Canadians, Commonwealth bursaries where you managed to get the fellows to some extent through a lot of different programs.  I don't see  it is not about DIPLO anymore, Canada does not have bursars, there is a bringing of the youth, that's great, but without pushing them through the program, understanding what it is about it and then jumping in to the  in to that process.  I wanted to maybe invite to you comment on what to do next based on this. 
>> Thank you. 
Certainly the involvement of the youth is very welcome in the IGF and in other international forum.
A few comments I have heard from participants, it often appears to be a flash in the pan.  They're brought in, made to look good, say what they have to say and then you don't see them again.  It must be distressful for youth to be put in this kind of environment and perhaps even enjoy it and think they want to do things then afterwards no followup after that. 
I wonder if you're collecting statistics on the amount of funding in capacity building across all of the organizations that make up this space including ticks, U, et cetera, whether you're collecting statistics, annual statistics to see the volume of financial sponsorship there is, that could include financial sponsorship from private sector organizations and governments, you appear to be saying there is a decrease in the funding, that's quite distressful.
The other suggestion, it was to introduce metrics as well as to the followup precipitation of those people that have been funded in the past.  I see a lot of colleagues here who are all DIPLO students to start with, or Internet Society, next generation leaders, which is great to see.  We see the ones that are succeeding but I wonder how many are there that have not succeeded in being able to pursue the work p.
Sometimes it is not actually due to any ability or lack of interest, it is really primarily due to the fact that they're not able to find an organization that funds them to come to places like here and I think we kind of have to understand we're the privileged few with many, many people out there that have tried to secure sponsorship to come here and then, of course, I'm told why don't they pay their way?  They're already not working in their main job, they're already taking time off work, why should they pay on top of that?  It is crazy.  There is definitely  if we could have some statistics on this and statistics and I'm sure other organizations would be able to supply input into this T would be good to see if we're rising or if the whole amount is actually decreasing which would be distressful since we speak more and more about capacity building but fund less and less of it. 
>> MODERATOR: Maybe just a show of common  about the statistics, the excellent ideas, the statistics of the annual budgets or available funds is definitely something we should do, it is not quite a problem if we simply for instance, DIPLO, I'm sure it is on the Web site, what is the input of  for the programs, the annual budget, whatever, for instance, from the DIPLO side, you can see it is the programs year by year.  A comment, it was from more from a personal impression talking with people, we should do that. Another thing we can also do, even shed the needs, budgets, for instance, the budgets we need for different types of programs we do.  So, we have comparing what is coming in and what we may need in the future.  The second comment, when it come metrics it is a good point. 
How to make a metrics of a success of followup on the community of the trained people that's a really tough thing to do.  We have been doing the community following for a long time.  It is hard especially because not everyone has to get involved with the IGF.  They can get involved on national level, regional level, Telco is providing small bits and pieces in institutions to make this track almost as hard as  maybe not, yeah, the ideas are welcome. 
>> We live in a connected world, we're all on these social networking sites.  I think that most participants keep in touch with each other and are aware of those that are left back home at the moment although we have tried our best.  So, to some extent, it is possible to get that information.  I mean, this is all about information. 
>> I just wanted to followup on what you were saying.  I think they can compare with the DIPLO class I was in, the classes I was in, and the number of people that I still maintain contact with in the different arenas, whether it is through the alumni but also through ISOK, ICANN, it is just amazing the  you know, just where those people have gone to still in the international organizations but as you say, it will be, we wonder about the others who were also doing a lot of the work.
Like they said, they may not be on a public  working at national or regional but it is very good to see where the students are. 
>> Just a few point about some of the steps we have taken to continuously engage our fellows and alumni.
One, we keep a membership database at ISOC, basically we have  what we have developed is a way to tag those alumni and so that we understand where we have regional meetings or fellowships.  We identify those persons as participants and we continuously engage them through that process.  Another way we continuously engage our alumnus is through the mailing list and we have a linked in group which we're constantly exchanging ideas, discussing best practices.  We also are looking at other organizations, like DIPLO, other fellowship programs and they're often involved in the communication.  So, the next step that we're attempting to move to right now, it is to develop an engagement environment sort of like an ISOC version of Facebook.  An environment that keeps not just our alumni but our chapters and organizational members engaged constantly engaged and involved in the work that ISOC does. 
>> Okay.  I do agree with the statistics and metrics and I think that we need statistics for the metrics.  Yeah, the metrics.  I said metrics!  It is statistics, that doesn't work!  Metrics works very well!
(Laughter).
>> As much as we do in capacity building, it is always not enough.  Always rudimentary when you compare it to the need of capacity building.  We said in a few minutes that capacity building is needed at all levels for anyone, for any country, for all.  Et cetera.  As much as you do, as a DIPLO foundation, any Istar or foundation, it is not enough. 
The best thing to do as a step forwards, it is to push our capacity building, building the programs of the development of any country, any organization, any natural, local, regional or international organization.  It is something that has to be done every time for everything, not only for technology, not only  as you said, we need capacity for all people.  I think that the best thing is to think about it as a standing thing, standing element of any program.
Thank you. 
>> If I may, try to wrap up the second part. 
We'll try to followup  I'll give a push on that to try to do a followup on the collecting or making that collection on who does what.  We try to create a database.
The second thing, that we together try to map the existing and the needed finances into full capacity building programs and the third one, basically showing the gap, or is not, so on, what we need, and the third one, it is to try to develop a metrics, not really develop but followup on a metrics, all of us, to try to show the effectiveness and the impact of the programs on the IG process, not only a global but also local levels.  So on. 
The last thing that I probably wanted to check is there anything else that we can do before the two IGFs or at the next IGF, is there any  I was thinking do we need to push for  I don't know, for a planning session, a specific event where we discuss something?  The problem when we discuss capacity building like this, we have only people with capacity building, we have no governments but for a couple here, but interested, again, in capacity building and no private sector, no  there is no one else who should support capacity building but all of thaws are working on that, it is quite an issue.  I'm in the sure how to manage to get them, we'll try with the report in some followup of this kind of an impact to show why they should invest more and not just talk about the capacity building.  If you have any ideas that are welcomed, what we may do in the next IGF or in between, it is welcomed.  Now or later. 
If you have any comments on that, anyone?  We'll just keep thinking about it.  Keep thinking about it.
Also, how do we strengthen the capacity building track of the IGF.  This is one way, but I mean at the IGF as well.  We have  this year we had the prevent, we may have more capacity building workshops or events, not necessarily workshops.  We managed this year to have failures, primarily the time, the location, the lack of distribution of the information about it and also lack of bringing the fellows that we have because those are the best beneficiaries of those sessions.  There are a number of things we can do.  There is a number of workshops proposed for the IGFs in fact of a capacity building nature.  Next year, we'll try to get more information about this kind of workshops and stimulate, to mark them clearly, the capacity building thing so that people know.  So, the ideas about how to strengthen the capacity building track, the IGF itself, it is also most welcomed. 
If no other comments, I would then just invite you to maybe leave your business cards or something, I will be glad to followup with all of them.  I have most of the contents, but not everyone has.
To be in contact, followup on that, and let's just try to followup on this. 
I think one copy is okay and I'll just retype or whatever and put everybody in contact.  Okay.
Thank you for coming. 
[Applause]

