WS 53 INTERNET ECOSYSTEM EVOLUTION 




 
EIGHTH INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM 
BALI BUILDING BRIDGES  ENHANCING MULTISTAKEHOLDER COOPERATION FOR GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 23, 2013  9:00 AM   WS 53 INTERNET ECOSYSTEM EVOLUTION
 

The following is the output of the real-time captioning taken during the Eigth Meeting of the IGF, in Bali, Indonesia. Although it is largely accurate, in some cases it may be incomplete or inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to understanding the proceedings at the session, but should not be treated as an authoritative record.

 

(Captioner standing by.)  
(Captioner stepping aware momentarily.)  
>> Okay.  Testing, 1, 2, testing 1, 2, 3.  Go ahead and write the check if you would.  Okay.  Good.  Does it sound good. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  Yes.  
>> Okay.  Good deal.  
(Captioner standing by.)  
Session 53, Internet ecosystem evolution.  
(Captioner standing by.)  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  Okay.  Good morning.  Let's get this started.  My name is Michael Kende, and this panel, ecosystem Internet evolution was meant to be the third of a group of panels about exploring how to build up an Internet ecosystem and industry creating content and applications.  The other panels were number 49 IXP, building, sustaining and governing them, which will take place this afternoon at 4:30 in room 1.  And that's organized also by ISOC.  And two members of that panel are here and will talk a little about that. 
And then number 215, encouraging locally relevant content to grow the Internet, which was organized by Disney and a few of those panelists are here and can talk a little bit about that one as well. 
This one is meant to build on those two, to talk about how to create and foster a broader ecosystem, which would be an industry that's creating content and applications and games to use the Internet and leverage all the assets.  And the way that we thought about it is that the IXPs, the Internet exchange points are used to localize traffic exchange and make it more efficient.  Locally relevant content in the local language is of course going to drive usage because it's most useful to people, talking about their lives and their culture.  But then to really drive the content and applications to drive the usage, you can think about a broader ecosystem and you can define that in many ways, but that would be one that has the venture capital and incubators to develop companies on the supply side, and good technical training to get people to be able to create those applications, and on the demand side, computer literacy, payment systems, and Internet access so people can get on line and buy or get access to these new content and applications. 
So the way we'll do it is we'll have a brief introduction from each panelist, talking about the various pieces and we'll open it up for a general discussion among the roundtable and take questions from the floor.  
And first to start the discussion on IXPs, we have Jane coffin from ISOC to talk  who is organizing the panel this afternoon on IXPs, and Mike Jensen, consultant who has done quite a bit of work about IXPs so Jane, do you want to start?  
>> JANE COFFIN:  Good morning.  Thank you for being here.  We certainly appreciate the early morning participation.  And I think we'll have questions after, yeah, Mike?  After the panel discussion.  
Okay.  As Mike said, the Internet society does work on something called Internet exchange points, IXPs.  It gets a will I go confusing because people often say ISPs, Internet service providers, they will exchange traffic locally.  We often say keeping local traffic local is one of the key things that builds up local.  It brings down late yens see which is something that creates delays in the network so you want better quality in the service.  It helps with local content development because people see there's a value in that quality of service that can use that infrastructure more.  They have a reliable infrastructure.  So we're promoting the development of Internet exchange points for both what we consider to be the human, the technical and the governance infrastructures.  Over the last 20 years we've seen that formula as the key formula for development of the infrastructure, the people, the technology, and the bottom up technical governance and human governance of that trucks.  So we're devoted  infrastructure, so we're devoted around the world to local environments to bring in these Internet exchange points and again it's a neutral meeting place where the networks come together to exchange traffic with each other.  It is not easy to get people to come together that compete with each other.  The hardest part we often say about bringing the IXP to a country is the social engineering, which is 80 percent of the work.  Putting an Internet exchange points together is not difficult.  It's a lot more complicated than I'm describing but we could set one up near a couple of hours if we had the right equipment and right infrastructure but the it's to develop the local Internet infrastructure and that ecosystem of Internet pieces.  So the IXP is not the one and only part you need in order to build that technical infrastructure.  It is a part of it.  It's a critical important part.  Again it helps with local connectivity, better local connectivity, better quality of service, faster uploads. 
We've seen mobile operators who connected to an ISP in the Democratic Republic of Congo had volume of traffic shoot up in four hours after connecting to the IXP.  There have been cost savings around the world in different countries and we've been able to prove this causal nexus between economics development and the IXP development.  We have a report out from last year, May 2012 for Nigeria and Kenya and we looked at those IXPs to see the interconnection between different players and the vaul u chain of the benefit.  Mike, my colleague and I are working on a report and he's going to describe that report in a minute and some of the metrics we're looking at for really focusing in on best practices, so this is an easier to understand infrastructure.  But again we want to create an environment where local people see the importance and  of using that infrastructure because of the reliability of the speed, the quality, and the local content.  Again local traffic, local means, you're not sending your traffic out to a third country to exchange it.  If you don't have an exchange point in your country, one ISP is taking their traffic out to another country, bringing it back in to talk to the other ISP.  It's very complicated if you don't have an IXP.  So we'll have a session this afternoon as Mike had said, and we'll dive deeper into how to create them, sustain them, and manage them.  
The most successful models we've seen are the bottom up, community of interest to sustain it because you need the buy in from the local community.  
The other key issue as I mentioned before is the human, the technical and the governance infrastructures, those pieces.  Part of the Internet ecosystem that is often overlooked because we are at a meeting like this and everyone's talking about different issues, one thing I want to hone in on is the human trust networks that are built when technical people get together and they see the benefit of that technology and how it works.  Again it's seeing people together in the same room who are trying to build that Internet infrastructure.  We recently held a meeting in Morocco in Casablanca, it was African peering and interconnection forum.  There are four like this around the world.  Raj, my colleague at the end, we helped host Africa which is another big meeting.  He can mention that a little bit.  Where people come together in a region, to exchange ideas, technical understanding and learn more.  At the Africa meeting we had over 30 people, meeting each other because if you're going to exchange traffic with each other, it's better to see each other to know who that person is and have a little bit more trust and faith in them.  That's that human network of trust that can't be underestimated.  It's been part of the core backbone of what we've seen on the Internet infrastructure around the world in the last 20 years. 
I'm going to turn it over to Mike now to talk more about it from a granular perspective, some of the work we are doing on this report that we're vilg on best practices, but know that we work with local communities around the world to build up ISPs, because it's where people want us to be.  As an Internet society we try and impose ourselves on a community.  They know we're a trusted resource, with expertise and local people on the ground speaking local languages so there's a great opportunity, if you're interested in building out local infrastructure to talk to some of our colleagues and experts where we do some in.  We also have programs where we bring in donated equipment, so that the cost of the startup is lower.  We're very, very, very keen to make sure that when we go into a local environment, that we help look at the sustainability of that infrastructure we're bringing in.  We don't recommend really high cost solutions.  There are very low cost solutions to help you get started up but we're cognizant of the fact that there is also that economic benefit of you sustaining that infrastructure so that we're not just giving you something that you can't sustain later on.  
So we're very keen to work with that local environment, understand what the environment's like, and help create more Internet infrastructure.  
>> MIKE JENSEN:  Thanks, Jane.  Yes, as Jane indicated, we are in the process of developing an IXP tool kit which has two functions, I guess, really, is to help countries where there are no IXPs, which are about half the countries in the world still, get their first IXP going, and then of course, many of the existing IXPs are not operating efficiently yet, or at the maximum of their potential to interconnect the local traffic.  So the idea there is to help those ones get to the next level as it were and increase the  their membership and the amount of traffic that they could exchange.  
And then of course you can think of this as a single IXP in each country.  Many countries actually require many more than one IX.  Brazil has around 20 now, I gather, and of course the larger countries will have many more, but even some of the smaller countries will need ones in the secondary cities, and as the amount of data that is exchanged locally increases, especially in developing countries where this isn't the case right now, but will be in the future, and the number of IXPs will have to go down to the tertiary level to succeed further.  Depending on the type of infrastructure available.  So we've been working quite a bit to try and develop an objective benchmarking process to look at the existing IXPs and to see what  how efficient they are, so we're trying to, for example, look at the number of AS numbers that are announced, the number of prefix that are present there at the exchange, the amount of traffic that takes place at the exchange, and then some of the more operational features, such as the type of institution hosting the IX, even the physical aspects of the IX in terms of gaining access to it.  
So many of those features to actually look at the existing IXs but then also to embed that in the environment that the IX is operating in, in terms of the communications and Internet sector.  For example, if there's a monopoly Internet service provider as there are in some countries still, there's actually not much use for an exchange or very little use for the exchange.  It can't really upgrade itself.  So we need to look at some of those factors, especially the dominance of incouple bans, which creates a big barrier to effective exchanges because they may not appear at the exchange if it exists, or they may limit the interest of other parties in actually getting an exchange going in many cases.  
And then of course the national interconnectivity environment is critical.  If there's only a single operator of fiberoptic networks in the country then there's going to be more difficulty in rationalizing the need for an exchange because there's not enough data.  Then at the local loop level, if there's not a diversity of Internet service providers then of course there's going to be less traffics exchanged, so there's some of those direct ecosystem factors that need to be addressed to ensure that an exchange can be as effective as possible.  And of course there are a number of indirect factors as well, such as the availability of reliability of electrical power, import duties or taxes on telecommunications, and Internet services also creates a barrier.  And then there's a general policy environment around things like requiring infrastructure sharing amongst network operators or providing access to essential facilities by incumbent operators, for example.  So there's a general policy environment that we're looking at to embed all of this benchmarking process to really understand what the environment is in the countries and what the factors are that need to be addressed to ensure that these exchanges are operating maximally.  Thank you.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  Thank you very much.  The next two speakers will kick off the discussion about locally relevant content and the importance of developing the Internet ecosystem in the country.  The first will be Dorothy Attwood, senior vice president for Walt Disney.  Andian Is cashing Lynn from UNESCO.  Dorothy will summarize briefly the panel froms yesterday on the topic and both will provide their perspective on the local con dent issues.  
>> DOROTHY ATTWOOD:  Great.  Thanks very much and I welcome the opportunity to give a brief summary of what we talked about yesterday.  I think there was several of us were on the panel yesterday, so I won't completely redo what we had said, but we basically I think there are three observations that were useful for this conversation today.  Overall, there was a general recognition of the importance of the pillar of locally relevant content to the health and advancement and fostering of the Internet economy, so it's a  it's almost taken for granted that people need to actually be interested in going on line, even when there's infrastructure in place.  The content drives that interest, and in developing countries in particular, the content that is of new importance is locally relevant content.  So one of the observations that the panelists discussed yesterday was that what did we mean by locally relevant content, because there were multiple kind of content, and we fleshed that out a little bit.  We identified that there is user generated content, that there is content that relates to the local community.  That's kind of news and information.  There's content that relates to the cultural preservation of stories and culture that was exemplified by one of our panelists talking about the dij at thisization and preservation of Balinese culture on  I've got  you knew I'd say it too because I had it  clearly I've had good food here. 
(Laughter.) 
And as exemplified by that.  There's the element of local content that is museum and institutional and educational in that regard.  And then there's a wide variety of what I would describe as professional content.  That is a burgeoning of locally relevant entertainment infrastructure in developing countries and then there are obviously companies such as mine, Disney, that are involved with development of professional content that is appealing because it's in local language et cetera, for local regions.  So we talked about the desire to flesh out the kinds of content that are of interest, but the overwhelming sense that I took away from the panel was that all of those types of content were important to fostering the interest in the interat the time as a medium for communication  the Internet as a medium for communication. 
The second was you had this locally relevant content but the key criteria for success was quality content and the quality element ties directly into what you're talking about in terms of the infrastructure, that is you need to have the ability to have not  no latency.  You needed a bandwidth capabilities.  You needed all the kind of infrastructure that will be probably more discussed this afternoon as well.  But that clearly an emphasis on quality made a huge difference in the use in interat the same time and enjoyment of the  entertainment and enjoyment of the content so that was an important element that came out. 
And the final piece I think that we discussed a bit was the need for economic support for locally relevant content, so you had a lot of content, you wanted quality content, but you also needed to have some economic viability and that that presented challenges in small communities with unique and individualized languages, but there was some discussion about the interests that global players are now having.  There's ideas I know we're going to be hearing about the seed money and the venture capital and the interest that is now starting to develop in the private sector, and then there was some discussion about the role of government there.  Janice might talk a little bit about what UNESCO is doing.  And the discussion was can government help this, because some of this kind of content, important, necessary in the public interest, but may not be economically viable, and nevertheless is very important.  So those were the kind of  the three major messages, I think that emerged from our discussion yesterday.  And we can talk more about that later. 
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  So thank you and good morning, everybody.  
Speaking about the role of government and the interest of UNESCO in local content development, the interest of organization the organization on these issues started already in early 2000, when our focus was more ensuring that more content in different, than English language would be put on line, so that was initial drive of UNESCO, arguing or promoting multilingual content.  Then thinking of what kind of incentives governments may have in order to invest in local content production.  We thought that economics or money talks the best with governments.  And we started to think if there is any economic incentive or let's say positive correlation between the development of local content, which is kept on local Internet infrastructure, and the price that local Internet users are paying for access to Internet locally.  
And we commissioned a study, it was a study that was done locally by OACD, ISOC and UNESCO, and we analyzed the data  first of all, we realized that there is not so much data we could rely on in trying to make this analysis.  Nevertheless, we made some assumptions and used data which indirectly may indicate the volume of local content, and what conclusions we arrived to was that the Internet infrastructure development and local content development, they go hand in hand, and better infrastructure leads to a bigger volume of local content on it.  We did not, though, proven the direct link between the access price and volume of local content, simply because we did not have sufficient or appropriate data for that. 
Nevertheless, the middle piece which I mentioned, local content, local Internet infrastructure and access point is very important.  I recall talking to one minister of communications of one of the northern African countries, and telling him about this study we did, and the conclusions we arrived, and he said, no, no, that does not work, and I said why.  Because in that country, local traffic represents five percent of all traffic.  95 is international traffic.  And what is  what was the reason, the reason was that all local content was kept on servers outside.  And so there is a very really strong correlation between these local activities and  in content production and development of local Internet infrastructure.  
I would also argue in favor of local Internet infrastructure because apart from having physical machines, it also helps to create local knowledge base about Internet, which is equally important to run successfully Internet operations in a given country and understand how to improve them and risk challenges.  If you purely rely on expertise from outside, that is maybe easy in the short run, but not sustainable in the long run.  
And finally I would like maybe be slightly provocative and, you know that now there are a lot of talks about cloud computing and where these clouds should be and whether they should all be in the north where natural  I mean outside temperature helps cooling machines or they should be based in every country, and so  and what I hear all the time, that keeping information on the cloud is cheaper than keeping information on CPU.  But what I don't hear in this debate is moving those bits of information from the cloud to machine and back and most probably several times costs something.  And how much that cost adds to this calculation, the cheapest and most efficient way.  So that is the question.  And most probably to the interesting  it would be interesting to look at how much moving bits of information from the cloud to machine and back adds to the cost of cloud computing.  And present the full picture.  The argument is it is already paid by access, because this is sort of bulk, which each Internet user is paying.  Fine.  I agree.  Nevertheless, if you look from the point of view of rationality, then moving unnecessary bits that clogs traffic, and so we need also to factor in and argue that argument into discussion.  
So I will stop here, and I will be happy to answer questions or engage in debate.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  Great.  Thank you. 
Now that we've explored the importance of locally relevant content, the next two speakers will kick off the discussion of how to jump start an industry that's creating it, not just the content but the applications and making it locally available and hopefully not on servers that are and hosted abroad but within the countries so that it can be accessed quickly and cheaply.  So the two speakers that will start speaking about that will be Raj Singh, the bureau director for Asia for the Internet society, and then Edward Chamdani, who is the could he founder and managing partner, of a company called ideosource in Djakarta, which is a venture capital and incubator working on developing consumer applications on line consumer applications.  First Raj.  
>> RAJ SINGH:  Thanks, Michael. 
So I'll make this comments from the perspective of other perspectives than ISOC, which I used to do before which is doing start ups and trying to make money and not lose money. 
So I've done startups in several countries, and in various sectors as well, not just technology but agricultural as well as real estate.  But let me talk about the technology piece here, or doing a technology startup.  One of the biggest issues I've come across is, and two, maybe three countries in this region, which is where most of my work is.  The issue is with capacity.  And the capacity in particular and also I think Mike and Jane alluded to the fact that you need technical skills to build and maintain and create the networks and also you've got your infrastructure in place but you need someone to run those things as well and they need to keep abreast of what's happening, be it security issues or whatever else.  So it's very important to be uptodate and of course in the Asia Pacific region in particular, they've got a great event called apricot which brings together more or less about a thousand people every year from the region and outside the region to discuss these very issues and the great thing about that fora, talking about the network, is that they all allow from competing interests.  They are from rival companies but they need to sit together because they know they need to find best practices or solutions for the technical issues.  That's fine.  That's work in progress.  That's happening. 
What I wanted to actually refer to is the other part of it.  So let's assume we have infrastructure, we have some great content floating around.  How do you then start  how does then the business sector start capitalizing on that and I think Edward will talk on the funding aspects and incubation. 
What I will talk about is two startups ago, we had a big challenge on our hands because these particular skill sets we needed to do the startup, we just worked for some companies in the U.S., but from Asia, was that there was a skill gap between what the Universities and colleges were producing and what we actually needed so a gap between what industry needs and what the academic institutions produce and for that it became a very serious matter.  In the end we gave up and we set up our own training programs.  We also did something else slightly different, which was we stopped recruiting from universities.  We went to the high schools and said any one of you want to come and have a go at building some interesting skills and joining a startup.  We had quite a few hands go up.  I think the first team of 40 that we recruited, a mixture of university graduates or others, I believe 12 I think were just out of high school.  So they had not gone into a tertiary institution yet.  They just had finished high school.  They were figuring out what to do next.  What we found out was when we took them on, trained them, obviously they had some IT skills and computing and all that, we trained them according to what we needed done.  And I'm happy to say one of those guys has become a CEO of a company.  He still doesn't have a degree.  He's never gone through any formal education.  And this stuff is picked up.  That's a great story.  But that doesn't happen all the time.  It's an extraordinary event.  So one is the skill gap between what academic institutions produce, what industry needs and where industry is headed. 
The other part of it is assuming we have all this done and we have guys producing software, but they need a market to sell to.  The market itself needs a level of literacy to be able to use this content.  Some people refer to it as computer literacy, digital literacy, whatever you want to call it.  I was in Nepal earlier this month.  There you don't actually need pen and pencil literacy to consume this content.  The traditional definition perhaps of literacy is you need to know how to read and write, but in the Internet age and particularly with multimedia and audiovisual, things that are available today, perhaps that approach is a bit wrong.  Digital or computer literacy doesn't mean you know how to read or write.  You need to know how to navigate a computer, to click and start up content.  You need to know how to type in a URL.  So that's one. 
And very quickly two other things that I wanted to mention in terms of this ecosystem, assuming we have the capacity and the skill sets, the other problem we have, and I'm also part of a mentoring group, we try to help young startups do what they need to do and see where they get.  And often they complain, they say I've got this great idea.  I know what I'm going to do great with it, but no one else believes that, and I think in Asia, at least in some parts of Asia, there's this issue about the risk appetite.  The traditional entrepreneurs have come from traditional industries.  You have a farm, you grow stuff, you sell stuff, you make money.  You have a factory, you make stuff, you produce stuff, you make money.  But a technology is a bit more volatile than that particularly in the tech startups, because there's no guarantee that the startup will succeed and sometimes the weird ones succeed and the great ones don't.  So that risk effect particularly in the Asia Pacific is there, and we have to develop that mindset within the traditional entrepreneur community that have a go.  Yes, 99 will fail, but maybe you'll have that one that does really well.  So perhaps this is a change in culture and mindset. 
And the last one I wanted to talk about is assuming all that is in place, you've got some great guys building apps and software and whatnot, there's also the issue of how people will pay for that content, assuming it's chargeable content.  Most people in this region or a large part of them don't have credit cards or debit cards.  They don't even have bank accounts.  But they still want to consume content.  They go for the free content because it's free.  But what's the payment model, and particularly when we're looking at micro payments.  It's not even large sums of money.  They're small sums of money.  Even that is not manageable.  Because sometimes to send 10 dollars it costs you 20 so that's part of the ecosystem discussion.  I'll leave it there because I think Edward may have some great insights on that.  
>> EDWARD CHAMDANI:  Okay.  Thanks, Michael, and I think very good point from Raj as well.  
My name is Edward, and I'm from ideosource and I'm running an incubator and venture capital based in Djakarta but we are investing also in the region as well, in Singapore.  The problem with the investment in startups technology in a country like Indonesia is unlike in the Silicon Valley where we can invest, there are plenty of investment for startups that has no track record, you know, no history.  In Indonesia and also in the region, we as in venture capital, we need to take a look at the possibility to have a sustainable, you know, portfolio of companies.  Why?  Because we know like Raj says, you know, we cannot afford to invest in 90 companies or 9 companies and then one, you know, flourishes because the ecosystem is not there. 
Unlike in the U.S., you have possibility to have multi players for the investment, by a lot.  But in Indonesia, usually the multi players will not, you know, be more than ten times, you know.  
So what Michael, you know, asked me to do, you know, for this forum is that to cover a bit about what kinds of companies are being funded by us, and then what challenges do we face, and then policies and infrastructure that help the portfolio companies. 
So the type of the companies that occupies first, I want to analyze on the Internet exchange that, you know, outside the IXP, which is a local like Mike mentioned, in Brazil, there are plenty of local exchanges.  In Indonesia, they're actually two.  You know, one is driven by associations called AG, and the second one is neutral, it's called IDC, and their plenty of ISPs residing in IDC because of price basically.  And if we take a look, you know, I think 50 to 60 percent of the occupancies in IDC is ISPs, and the data is there, so we can actually capture who they are.  
As far as the, you know, within the ISPs, what type of contents, you know, reside there, I collected data of the trend in a consumer Internet based on the tech in Asia.  If you go to tech in Asia.com, 49 percent for the last six months, you know, Q 2 and Q 3, 2013, 49 percent occupied by Ecommerce players, and then 19 percent on line games, 19 percent on line media, payment, four percent, advertising network, around three percent, and mobile messagings and the rest, around two percent.  So I think if we want to focus on, you know, local contents, you know, those are the bigger ones.  
And why we don't see any on the social media is basically we know that Indonesia has around more than 50 million Facebook users, so basically while on the social media, there's no chance for incubators and venture capital to develop a local social media platform anymore, because, you know, Facebook has dominated already.  Twitter is also in millions in Indonesia, very popular.  Pact is also coming up in Indonesia, so we see the trend of Facebook users used to be an AB segment, now coming down to C and D.  While the path is coming up, you know, because it's limited to 150.  A lot of the maven and also the leaders that knows the technologies a lot, they goes to path now. 
So I think if you, you know, go deeper, for example, on the the Ecommerce side, we have  travel is very popular in Indonesia.  Multi product Ecommerce site, very popular as well.  Travel I think is around 18 percent or  yeah, 18 percent.  Multi product Ecommerce, around 17 percent, B to B multi place, 13 percent  sorry.  Travel, 18 percent.  Apparel, accessories is Ecommerce, very popular, where they sell fashions and cosmetics, that's 17 percent.  Multi place, we have popular multi places in Indonesia, like Toko media, those startups, and discount, likes Groupon.  We call these two in Indonesia. 
So I think back to the  those are the type of companies that are being funded and also we have planted in Asia. 
Challenges we do face right now, especially in Asia, we don't have any government support.  That's what we face right now, so some of our portfolio we actually incorporated in Singapore.  Why?  Because the tax treaty is much better.  The investment environment is  ecosystem is there.  In order to set up a company, we need seven months to set up a company.  In Singapore, just one day.  And then also the government support in Singapore, we have government support in the way of a fee of investing $1 and the government invests $6.  It's a very good attraction for investors to have this kind of scheme, you know.  
And then quality of Internet connectivity is also a factor.  You know, that's the reason also in Asia, more than 50 percent, close to 60 percent of online payment is being done off line, meaning that you click the shop card, and then you have to pay through ATMs or to on line banking system.  Unlike in the U.S., you know, you have Pay Pal, a credit card is common.  Indonesia, credit card users is not that many actually. 
So we face those kind of an issue in Indonesia with payment as well as logistics.  
Okay.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  So thank you very much.  
So thanks, everyone, for running through that.  Now it would be good to open up the discussion, and first if any of you have any comments or thoughts on what the panelists were saying, that would be great.  Just to get some reflection and then I have some questions and of course would love to get questions from the audience.  Does anyone have any comments or thoughts?  Mike?  
>> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  There's a common factor when we speak here about multistakeholderism and the multistakeholder model and in some cultures when using that word is very strange, let's say many people and many people have a role in the environment.  Government is an important factor and we're just hearing different challenges and the interface that you almost have to have with government.  I think we often forget as the Internet community or the startup community or even if we're at UNESCO and other places, you almost are in a role on occasion of teaching government officials more about the ecosystem and the environment.  I used to be a government official, so I'm not being disrespectful.  But when I needed to understand more about technology, Internet exchange points, Internet addressing, I went to the people that knew more than I did, and it's very hard for some government officials to admit they don't know something, and so you have to interface and I learned a lot when I  I see a colleague in the back laughing. 
We really do need to figure out a better way as the Internet community to get our message out about the great work that we do, the work we do together in partnership.  This is not something we ever do alone.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is coffin. 
>> JANE COFFIN:  And you see we have an UN institution, Michael who is an economist, Dorothy who knows about a lot of different things from regulatory to other, Raj and Edward on startups.  We all are partners in different ways with different institutions and trying to not forget that how we interface with government officials and teach them if we can quietly without be disrespectful but also taking them out of their element so that they don't feel as though they're with their own colleagues and they're embarrassed.  Often you find that you have to have oneonone sessions and then you can figure out a way to be a better partner, but there's a way to try and create a nonantagonistic environment and I think that's important because if we're ever going to get the policy environment right, the regulatory environment right, some of these things that probably make your head hurt if I talk about submarine cables in the backhaul from the sub ra mean cable landing station, if you don't have a liberalized environment with those sub ra mean cables that carry almost all the traffic in the world.  The Internet doesn't run around in the cloud.  The cloud is really submarine cables and piece parts.  You need to have a good environment for the submarine cable, to bring the traffic into the country at lower prices.  We're talking about bringing the price of connectivity down because when the prices go down as the UNESCO report says, connectivity goes up, traffic goes up, volumes go up, the prices come down.  Those are just facts.  So if you can bring down that cost of connectivity, which is what we're trying to do with IXPs, which is what we do when we talk to other officials, if you bring those officials into the ecosystem, that can help.  That's one of the key issues.  
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  Thanks, Jane.  I wanted to reinforce what she said in terms of the cost factor, developing countries, African countries, you're looking at the average broad band costing 50 percent of the average salary, that's compared to two or three percent in Europe.  Until we get that cost factor down through all of these different ecosystem aspects, we're not really going to see a lot of local content developed.  
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  I just had an interesting observation about the issue of where the cloud sits and the cost of moving bits back and forth from the cloud from a foreign country. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  The last one was Jensen. 
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  I think the cloud should be considered including the pipes going to the cloud, and clearly the economic imperative is such that people are moving their applications off shore as it were on to the cloud.  And I think perhaps an interesting dynamic that is now reared its head this year is the Snowden revelations which have now increased awareness and interest actually in bringing those bits back into the country's cloud at any rate, and not to see the cloud as some large dark entity somewhere else in the world, and I think that dynamic is going to have an interesting role to play in the coming short term future.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  Okay.  Any questions for any of the panelists?  
>> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  I'm from Hong Kong.  I'm interested in the comment from the gentleman of Indonesia.  Obviously you gave a very good set of reasons why certain investment in startups hasn't happened.  You made a comment about payment, I believe.  It seems to me, you know, before the Internet, there was another network.  It's also global.  It also sort of shifts bits around.  That's the banking network.  So a lot of developed economies, who are not yet connected into the Internet, may not actually also have a banking network.  So I'd be interested in your thoughts, but how are you going to solve that, because on the other hand you want to promote Internet.  One great killer effort of the Internet is getting paid.  If you can't route money, then is it only going to be a social thing?  Because you can't develop your Ecommerce infrastructure if you can't get paid or you can't pay.  
>> EDWARD CHAMDANI:  Yeah.  That's a very good question, and also many outsiders, you know, from abroad, coming to Indonesia, they're quite appalled by the nature of online, you know.  We know it's a 250 million population, but unfortunately we have more than 50 percent of unbanked people.  It's not just because they don't have the money, but it's more like it's ten kilometers away to go to the bank, you know, so it's very difficult for them.  So again connectivity is very important.  Accessible to mobile connectivity is very important for the mobiling payment.  But it's not  there is no one dominating payment system in Indonesia, so it's unfortunate. 
Like I said, more than 50, 60 percent online payment is being done by, you know, mostly bank solution.  You know, it's a bank centric payment system.  
Fortunately most large banks in Indonesia, they provide plenty of options.  You know, they have on line Internet web based payment.  They have a mobile payment system.  Even in mobile payment, some banks, they provide a solution based on a U MB, and also on the wall.  So there's plenty of options for this on line consumer payment, you know.  But that's also a problem.  There is no common major, like in the U.S., that you can use credit card and credit card is a base.  You can connect to Pay Pal, you can connect to many types of payment.  It's centralized.  
So in Indonesia, what happened, there's a wide variety of payments, but the volume is big, it's huge.  If you take a look in one of the articles in tech in Asia, basically right now, you know, people from abroad begin to understand, the volume of online transaction is a lot.  It's also increasing.  And no dominating payment system is, you know, exists in Indonesia right now. 
I hope that answers your questions. 
>> Thank you, I think the gentleman from the WC 3 group is here.  That may be something interesting to follow up.  
>> I just wanted to add just on this payment issue, in India there's a company called flip card.com, which is a really dominant player in that landscape.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Raj Singh.  
>> RAJ SINGH:  So they have an interesting payment model.  It's called cash.  And specifically it's called cash on delivery.  So you go on line, you do your goondz and services, whatever you need.  They'll knock on the door, hand you the goods and ask for your money in cash.  I talked to one of the guys, they said they stopped offerings that service in certain parts of India.  I said why.  The people order what they want, it arrives at their door, they haven't seen the product before, they open it up, they don't like its color.  It's part of the return policy, that they take it back in whatever days it is.  So they started demarketing the company where they will not offer cash on deliverly or COD.  It was just a response to your question of what is another payment model.  There's the old cash payment model but obviously that has Sol challenges too depending on what the customer is doing or not doing.  
>> JANE COFFIN:  I think we have to think about trusted environments because you can see one of the limitations is the inability of banks to believe that they're going to have the capability to avoid fraud and so you're not seeing  Africa has a really huge issue in this respect.  You're not seeing some of the multi nationals that could offer some other payment platforms entering some markets because the perception that there are mechanisms in place to avoid fraud and security issues, and so I think that's one of the things we can work on from an infrastructure perspective, to add the security element that could in fact encourage some other different forms of payment methods beyond the issues of micro payments and that kind of thing.  
>> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Thank you.  And if I can ask a followup question on that.  In many developing countries, there's models, but maybe we can talk a little bit about if those markets are developing or if those possibilities exist on the content side for gaming and for other things that are typically or can be advertising supported.  
>> EDWARD CHAMDANI:  Yes, I want to add what happened with the content.  If you see that Facebook, they have more than 50 million, but  and also gaming, like in IT.  It's very difficult for Indonesians to actually buy items on credit.  So what happened is that Indonesians, they love free contents, you know.  So I think we need to focus at the beginning to see more networks, to capture those on line users, so we actually monetize from the other side, you know.  We don't charge that to the consumer, but actually brands or other advertisers would pay for that, you know.  That's one way.  And then it's also I want to say something I forgot.  But we see one of my portfolio, take that for example, they develop a lot of good content in gaming, and because of the ease of monetizing in Indonesia, so they go abroad, so what they do is they use publishers like Google app stores, to monetize, and then they collaborate with local publishers in China to publish their game, localize the games, as well as in Japan as well.  So that's what they do as a local content provider.  But for local content itself, the ecosystem is not there yet in ooind, so it's difficult for content owners to monetize in Indonesia, so what we do now in ideosource is we actually entice our portfolio companies to create a platform whereby their expertise, you know, with connecting with the app networks and everything, so there's a way for these developers in that, with our portfolio companies, SDK, as a wrapper with all the connectivity to the app networks there, so they're able to monetize that from day one, when they use this wrapper.  You know.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  Okay.  Thank you.  Any other questions?  
>> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Christopher from the University of Pennsylvania. 
This conversation to me strikes me as very important but it reminds me very much of a fixed line world in a world where the ecosystem is moving towards wireless and I'm wondering if you could comment on  in the world where LT isn't deployed, the old wireless world was still circuits where legacy telephone technologies bypasses a lot of this and I'm wondering if you could expand your remarks, if any of the panelists can expand their remarks, particularly in the hiatus from a full LT deployment in a lot of world, how you see ecosystem evolving.  
>> JANE COFFIN:  I would make just one comment from the content providers perspective, it's not just moving from a mobile environment but it's moving to a smartphone environment, so right now you're still limited to the feature phone environment and in many of these locations so that limits the richness of the content that, you know, we could do, whether it's interactive or, you know, in a game kind of environment.  It also goes to the issue of advertising supported models, because the feature phone doesn't have that same  it's much more subscription based, you know than it is having the kind of multimedia rich content. 
Now, we're moving rapidly toward having those kinds of devices become more, you know, more accessible.  I think you're also seeing government policy encouraging that.  You know, you see tablets being offered in educational content for educational content of schools by governments, but I don't think it's as simple as mobile versus fixed.  I think there is an equipment element to that, as well as an infrastructure element, and until you see that, I know from Disney's perspective, there's a big question, do you build for a feature phone or do you build for a world even though the addressable market is quite small, using Indonesia as an example.  But I think that is a gainor as well.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  That was Dorothy Attwood. 
>> With imaging technologies with wireless, you know, I think there's a policy issue around that too, and in particular let me go further to say it's actually a tariff issue as well.  In the couple of countries I reside in. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Janis Karklins.  
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  Two have introduced LTE networks and the subscription rates are ridiculous.  Yes, it's fast, right.  But why should I pay five times the amount, you know, and when I'm really not going to be consuming all that much more.  It'll just get to me quicker maybe.  So I think that's also an issue, and of course what perhaps makes that situation worse is because of course a lot of governments have been auctioning off the spectrum as equally ridiculous rates and obviously there's an overhead, that money has to come from somewhere.  And that's subscription, so the issue is that the technology is great, but we have a few obstacles on the way in terms of regulatory and the tariff environment maybe.  
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  At UNESCO we see many ministries of education see the great potential in mobile technology and tablets.  There are now concepts emerging, like school and the box. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  The prior one was Mike Jensen. 
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  Where tablet is the dissenter, where it's a very powerful computing piece, but like weight, you  lightweight, you can upload all the educational consent, you put a solar battery next to it and an off the shelf projector, put a sheet between branches somewhere, you have a school.  Of course this is a tlojical part of it and you need to have a trained teacher, but nevertheless the tendency is to explore the potential which gives these mobile devices for education, and at UNESCO we're working with technological companies, and once a year we're organizing so called mobile learning week, where companies are coming and showcasing the  their products, they're exchanging information, and they meet education professionals, so that I think this is the one trend which we can say exists now.  
>> JANE COFFIN:  As a response to your question, this may seem a granular answer but it goes back to a point that I think Dorothy was making about equipment.  It's one of my big issues these days because we're trying to move some switches and ladders out to help build Internet exchange points, the customs duties, the taxes for equipment are killing us.  We're a nonprofit.  We're sending donated equipment to a country that's new, also used still pretty good.  So take that there.  But this is an issue where if you're an intervator or a small business, you too can try and push.  It's the push pull of government and others, if you can't get that equipment in and it's held in what I call jail at the border, it's really complicating your ability of a country to move though that next level, we call it leveling up.  For example on the spectrum side, you can't get the equipment in to facilitate the business, and/or the entertainment or something else.  So as we're saying, there's the whole ecosystem of different issues, value chain.  Michael before he came to the Internet society was at Analysys Mason helped us with a report called removing connectivity and Raj and I are doing one here in Asia, where we take a different part of the system whether it's government and investment policies and attracting investment, is the policy regulatory, the tax, other Internet exchange points, but different parts of that system that you can help alleviate and sometimes you just do have to shine a light through a report or others or panels like this where you can pull apart those different factors, which might help.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  Any other questions?  No?  
>> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Okay.  My name is May Ann, and I come from IGF from Singapore.  Thank you very much for the panel.  I realize the panel spans quite a large range of issues and I was trying to take notes because I think Michael requested for some assistance there.  I'd like to make a comment on the idea of entrepreneurs.  We've covered things like developing local content, payments, and supporting of startup  the startup community.  
I think that for the  from my point of view, where I'm seeing it, because I do work in computing in Asia, I think that the next development for business and sustainable entrepreneurship will be from the small and medium enterprise units.  I think everybody pretty much agrees with that.  In Asia especially, 99.99 percent of all businesses are small and medium enterprises, however you want to define that.  In terms of revenue or in terms of employees.  And we're seeing some leap frogs happen in the world already.  So for example we were talking about problems with payment.  Kenya is a great example that's been used all over the world.  My company has done work in among goal I can't, in Indonesia, as well as we've recently concluded a study in Sri Lanka on the unbanked and under banked and how they can use not just smartphones.  I know Dorothy mentioned that we're moving into a smartphone community, but I think there is also a place for feature phones, because you've got the codes that you can use to transfer money.  So you've got these mobile banking opportunities that have sprung up because of a gap, and that's fantastic.  The real issue, and I think  I think that the  there are opportunities there that are yet untapped, so that's number one, the payments issue is readily available, I think.  And ready to go.  
There are regulatory barriers that have been flipped up, because I think the people most well connected would be the telcos, but they don't have a financial license.  That's a regulatory barrier for them to entry.  So you've got the infrastructure already.  It can be done.  Regulation hasn't gone on quite yet.  So that's for payments. 
For content sharing, we're seeing a lot more new services being made available.  Pandora was the first thing that started with Internet radio and now we're seeing Spotify with content sharing.  So you have the giving away of access, but you buy access again on the smartphone and the mobile world, and that's based on a subscription basis as well.  I'm from Singapore.  I don't actually have Netflix available to me yet.  That's very sad.  But here we're seeing another development.  Education and books, I think there is a new startup called oyster which again comes up with this idea of content sharing and access to content rather than buying the book.  So there goes your Amazon mobile with buying.  And we're fairly well connected with payments and with infrastructure.  We can't actually buy the books because of geographical boundaries that exist in the wired world.  I think somebody mentioned we're moving from a wired world to a wireless world.  So for me I think that the support of startups is quite essential today.  So what you mentioned about the comparison, you know, why you do this in Indonesia, because there was more support in Singapore, that was very interesting to me.  I'm personally working on a 14 country study of SMEs and computing and the government policies that are supporting startups and SMEs in these 14 countries, and that's coming up soon.  Probably next year.  So if you want, I can share that with you.  
But I think again the corollary to all of this great positiveness is that we have  I always find it interesting to note that reducing barriers to connectivity, increasing globalization, allowing people to move on line and access content that's not available in their own country, well that stymies the local content development.  If I can get a book off Amazon, if I can get something off Amazon, why do I want to buy it from my local store, or if I can read something that's available on the  in the national website, why do I want to make sure that I can  why do I want to read it from a locally hosted server, for example, even though it may be the same thing.  There are some issues there which I haven't quite thought through yet.  I don't think that we  that we've gotten to the point where we can actually see, because I think we're still focusing on infrastructure development, and just making sure that everybody's connected first, but I see that as an upcoming issue. 
Thanks.  
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  I want to go back to the payments issue, and one of the issues in the startup economy, let me call it the startup economy, is the micro payment issue, and more so the cut this payment gets when you buy or sell something.  Or when you sell something, I should say.  Be it Apple, which has its own rather high margin cut, or be it the third party providers, which also have a pretty significant cut of what you have.  And if you're selling something for $2, an app, let's say, you know, if 60 cents out of that goes away to someone else and you're left with a dollar 40, then you've got the overage to pay.  Sure, if you have volume, if you have a million people who use the app, great, but there are not that many apps with a million users, in the thousands or tens of thousands at best.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Raj Singh.  
>> RAJ SINGH:  So the micro payment model I think is going to be quite critical for our future success.  I wanted to emphasize that.  
>> Yes, it's very true on the payment side to leverage the content.  Basically we are in discussion with Japanese venture capitalists as well whereby in Japan, they have a platform, I forgot the name, but it's probably  I mean the platform that they have is actually integrating the Telco with the banks, so the Telco and the banks work closely.  So what they take from the content owners is only like seven percent to maximum ten percent.  So that's why we see a lot of contents in Japan, and the consumers actually buys a lot of it.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Edward Chamdani.  
>> EDWARD CHAMDANI:  In Indonesia we collaborate with the Telcos.  The credit is 40 to 60 percent depending on the content providers.  But we are seeing right now Telcos trying to move to other type of payment that regulators allows them to charge, you know, for example, and in a telecom sale, they have T casts.  In excel they have whatever.  But the issue is a lot of with the adoption is because of the regulation, kyc and knowing your customers, they find it very difficult to have an adoption.  So it's back to the like mentioned by, you know  it's not a matter of not having the technologies, but, you know, making a platform popular basically.  
>> JANE COFFIN:  And I guess I wanted to comment on your comment on the difference between content that's globally sourced and local content and how that works and we talked about that a bit in the panel yesterday, because there seems to be some perspective that there is a tension between the support for locally relevant content that may be. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Dorothy Attwood. 
>> DOROTHY ATTWOOD:  That may be appealing to a niche market and content that may be of a global interest.  I'll use a Hollywood movie versus a local story.  And, you know, my perspective is that there is no tension.  That there is in fact a desire for both, and that the capacity that's built in order to create compelling content, that is an environment that is encouraging of creativity that is in fact expressed  richly expressive, it's not censored.  That's necessary for all kinds of content and in fact what the Internet platform does is enhances the ability to create different communities that may support a business model that in the physical world wouldn't be supported.  So we were talking at the panelists were talking before we started the panel about the interests that, in either language or culturally small groups can find content on the Internet that they couldn't before, which creates markets, which actually allows a global distribution.  If it's an Indonesian story that would resonate with Indonesians in the U.S. or in Africa or in Europe, that's more likely now to see the light of day than had there not been a platform that would allow that, because of the disapora, because of the effect of being able to have communities find that kind of content.  So while there is some commodification, I don't know if that's a word, my economist, I need to have  making the  while there is some concern that you create xhod at thisization, some concern that you'll go to the lowest price point for some, I think that when it comes to content, the differentiator is in fact the uniqueness of that story, and the quality of that product, and so I don't see the tension.  I think that's a  but it's an interesting  it's an interesting question to kind of solve.  
>> About that local content issue, we're seeing fabulous diaspora related business coming up where say in Nigeria, there's something called Nolly wood, they copied boly wood, which has been a successful venture in India for movies.  And what Nolly wood is doing, it's called Uroca, it's based in the U.K., it would be local if they had better network capabilities.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Jane Coffin.  
>> JANE COFFIN:  But they're building up the sports and entertainment industries in nigh jeer ra and they're (off microphone) but requests for that content are coming from all over Africa, and all over the world, because you have pockets of the disapora outside of that.  And I know the content in parts of Africa is being built up.  Columbia is wanting to become a movie center or a content generation center so you're seeing different businesses pulling up with a disapora pulling it.  Where you get the disapora helping to keep the small businesses and the startups going. 
And the other thought I just had when we were talking about local banking, the Greming bank had this great model with local banking, loyalty to that local bank and mobile, so there's a potential opportunity there for that interface, a great business opportunity quite frankly with the local banking. 
(Lost connection.)  
>> 
>> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Freedom house and I live and work in Morocco.  Just a couple of comments about the idea of local content.  In developing countries, the issue of local content is quite political.  The print media and broadcasting in particular are quite controlled by the states.  There is a lot of repressive laws that govern print and broadcasting.  Online media becomes this new sphere, public sphere where people can actually say things, and not only that, but as we've seen with the Arab spring, how Twitter and Facebook were very instrumental in organizing and mobilizing people.  It wasn't the reason why the Arab spring happened but it helped a lot. 
What you mentioned about traffic happening, most of it hang overseas, is because most of the  happening overseas, it's because most of it is local content.  It's for political reasons.  Most people are wishing they could host it.  The amount of control the states have over the ISPs.  The Internet service providers, which of course allows them direct control over traffic within the country, so that's why they go overseas.  So I mean I like the discussion about the technology and about the innovation, the business models, but when it comes to developing countries, not democratic countries, the power of the Internet in pushing for democracy and pushing for a better life, because it's not all about money and economic prosperity.  It's about the right to express yourself, the right to have your voice heard, the right to have an I believe pact in the political progress  an impact in the political progress, and we've seen that happening.  We're not saying that we have to have help to do this.  But it's important in discussions about technology, that the focus is also on that potential of the liberating potential of the media  of Internet.  
Thank you.  
>> I think that rights existed before.  They were very limited opportunities of selfexpression in many countries and indeed Internet provide that opportunity and liberate and gives voices to those who were never heard.  
Humans always have been socially active and wanted to communicate and myself, I'm coming from Latvia, and Latvia, 20 years ago.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Janis Karklins.  
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  It was a very interesting discussion with the one editor of newspaper in Russia.  He said in Soviet times, there were thousands of letters of readers to the newspaper expressing different opinions and anger and joy and so on.  And that was editor in chief who picked one, two, three and published them every day in the newspaper.  He said today, nobody writes anymore, any letters to the newspaper, but everybody has its own blog.  And so that is the difference.  The point is people always have been socially active.  The Internet provides really a very good platform for selfexpression and so that is indeed a very big advantage, and thank you for raising that issue.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  I think we have time for one more question.  If not, I'll just maybe ask a final question and people can comment object it. 
So Janis talked about the first OACD ISOC UNESCO report and there's a correlation between access and local content.  And, you know, I understand it's very hard with the numbers, there's not enough data available to really, you know, say definitively what drives what, but I just wondered if people had thoughts about whether more local content will drive  will get more people on line, because there's clearly people who, you know, there's many people who could have access to the Internet that aren't for various reasons.  Or the other way around, will the more users come on line, will it naturally bring out the opportunities for more content, or is it really a kind of a mixed thing?  So kind of which way  what's driving of the content  what's driving it, the content or the users?  
>> So, you know, I think  it's an interesting question.  I don't think there's one straight answer to that.  But I think what is required is a critical mass of users, to be to support local content.  What that critical mass is I think depends on the matter itself.  For a large market, a large language base, let's say, ten percent of that language base could be a sufficient enough market but for a very small language base it may require 50 to 80 percent of that market to be on line and connected to be able to support a local content ecosystem. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Raj Singh. 
>> RAJ SINGH:  So I think reaching a critical mass.  I think in many instances we are nearly at that critical mass in most countries and even if the countries that are not at the critical mass, people want to be part of that critical mass, there's a desire to be connected and to be on line and to do things.  The content piece itself you have popular content which may not necessarily be local.  It may be Hollywood or Disney.  
>> DOROTHY ATTWOOD:  Or both of us. 
>> RAJ SINGH:  And I'm waiting for cars and trains.  I think it was you, Janis, who when you buy a paper, the first couple of pages is local news, when you get to the global news on the fourth or fifth page.  When people are on line and accessing the content.  
>> JANE COFFIN:  I guess I would make an observation too, I think as an industry, the content entertainment news, it's  it is a rise to quality.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Dorothy Attwood. 
>> DOROTHY ATTWOOD:  It has to be because people don't spend money if they're not interested in that as an entertainment value, they don't stay reading a story if they're not engaged, and I think that that actually tends to create the  if the capacity is there, the interest only grows.  New business models are created in order to access that content.  New kinds of content are created by virtue of the capability, the technology capabilities whether it's an interactive content or a grouping of being able to watch a new  a program around the world with friends, real time.  That's all now coming to fruition, they call it the second and third screens, because of the new technology and new capabilities.  So I do think content has a unique role to play in driving the interests and that itself, because it is quality based or typically is quality based, if you don't like the programming, that tends to encourage investment, encourage entrepreneurship, encourage new types of business models like Spotify and Netflix and a global audience.  So I think it's a truly a virt yours cycle of one creates the other and all three are necessary.  
>> I would argue with language issue.  I think language might be a barrier to access information.  And if information is not available in the language that person masters, so automatically that excludes him from being on line and taking part in this process. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Janis Karklins.  
>> JANIS KARKLINS:  That's why also local content most likely will be in local language.  And so that will drive up the potentially Internet users.  
Second aspect is education.  We see that if we take back ten years, when the OSS started, the main objectives that were put forward as a result of the discussion was connect schools.  Today we see that majority of schools are connected and also we've seen that there is an exponential growth of use of Internet around the world, and one can think that, let's say new  young population is the one which really drives the growth of the number of Internet users.  We hear stories that kids are spending every penny they get to get on line, in cyber cafes and so on, and again we need to pay attention, what kind of content they access and if there is not good quality content, of different character, entertainment or education or cultural or whatever, so then of course the next is they get what they can get.  Or access what they can get.  They call it the local content also is  the quality of the local content also is an issue.  
So I think we cannot say that one drives other or vice versa.  I think this is a sort of mutually reinforcing movement, and more we have users, more content we need to have, and certainly more content we will have, more curiosity will have from people and they will start using if they are not using until now.  
>> Yeah.  Local content, the way I see from the ecosystem is, you know, having this forum right now is very good.  I have a chance to meet up with Dorothy from Disney.  In the past, one of our portfolios is cooperating with like Nickelodeon is based in Singapore, a licensing business, so basically we license the Sponge Bob characters and we develop games, so this type of things is very good, because we know there's a market already for that.  
>> THE CAPTIONER:  This is Raj Singh.  
>> RAJ SINGH:  So collaborating with a good brand, established brands, and also channels that is established already.  For example like top line.  They have actually tapped into the Indonesian market in a way that they create local characters and they sell emote cons basically and it's a good way for them to actually sell and monetize the platform. 
>> THE CAPTIONER:  Actually this is Edward Chamdani. 
>> EDWARD CHAMDANI:  And I think path is doing the same thing.  They're selling emote cons.  I don't know.  Ind neen shashs love it.  So yeah, we need to also collaborate, I think, with a lot of established brands, established like companies like Disney and Nickelodeon and others.  Just from my point of view.  Thanks.  
>> MICHAEL KENDE:  Okay.  That wraps up the time, so the last thing is please join me for thanking the panel for an excellent discussion.  
(Applause.) 
(End of session.) 

