145 Nusa Dua Hall 1 




EIGHTH INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM
BALI
BUILDING BRIDGES – ENHANCING MULTI-STAKEHOLDER COOPERATION FOR GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
October 24, 2013
11:00 a.m. CT
IMPORTANCE OF REGIONAL COORDI BUILDING BRIDGES – ENHANCING MULTI-STAKEHOLDER COOPERATION FOR GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
OCTOBER 23, 2013
3:30 BALI TIME
WS 316
Internet of Services-granting Human Rights at the Internet
 

The following is the output of the real-time captioning taken during the Eigth Meeting of the IGF, in Bali, Indonesia. Although it is largely accurate, in some cases it may be incomplete or inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to understanding the proceedings at the session, but should not be treated as an authoritative record.

 
(This text is provided as a realtime service and is not to be copied from any live event.  Please contact Caption First if you would like to receive a properly formatted transcript of this event.)
>> MODERATOR: Okay.  Ladies and gentlemen, let's start our workshop, Empowering Displaced People.
The initiative of this workshop belongs to the representatives of the academia community.  I'm the Dean of Business in the School of Economics and I'm glad to welcome all of the participants, all our remote participants.
First let me introduce the organizers of the workshop.  It is Dr. Svetlana Maltseva and Mikhail Komarov, from the NRU Higher School of Economics and Mr. Ajay Ranjan Mishra who represents the ITU Technical Community.  
I'm glad to introduce the panelists, it is Audrey Shcherbrovich, faculty of law, higher school of economics.  We have the Microsoft technology officer for Middle East and Africa. 
We have the head of policy for global Columbia and in Peru.
We are the president of a chapter of the Internet Society.  We have  Nevine Tewfik will not be with us.  
And Roxana Radu represents the Institute of International and Development Studies.  
I'm sorry, some changes in our panelists. 
We have the representative of Ministry of The University, the founder, Yuliya Moenets, the executive director of together against cybercrime International Organization.
We can start.  
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH:  Let me and the organizers, allow us to do some short introduction into the workshop topics.  Please show them the presentation. 
I must say, this workshop, this is to understand the needs of the refugees and displaced people and immigrants and to discuss the abilities to address these needs. 
I think it is interesting to see some statistics that indicates the problems of displaced people.  Unfortunately I  I didn't see this.  Okay.  I'm sorry.  You can see that  you can see the permanent growth of the amount of displaced people in the world.
You can see, also, that the top destinations of people who are living abroad, it is the United States and the Russia, my native country, now in second place, also you see east, more attractive countries for immigrants and refugees. 
Maybe it is interesting to see that more than half of the refugees come from only five countries, Afghanistan, Somalia, Iraq, Sudan.
It is interesting to see that the Europe, Asia, we can see all of the same number of immigrants.  More than 70% of immigrants are of working age.  It is critical for them to find job and it is critical services in employment in the skills.
From the point of view from host country, from the point of view services, offer services, maybe you begin to identify main groups of displaced people.  If it is newly arriving refugee, low income resident, citizens in the homeland. 
For those groups, the services must be different.  What are the main immigration and refugee service groups?  You can see this, you see the employment and skill combination, housing, healthcare, finance, maybe it is on the top of the list. 
If we think of how we can help in organizing these services using the Internet technologists and the information technologists, we have discussed this in the Internet Governance forum, first of all, maybe we can see on their trends for customer services, those strengths are used successful in business and may be critical for the services for these groups or for people for  such as refugees and immigrants.  Also it is interesting concept, this is the way to look at this, but you see that the numbers here are based on very big deals and for immigrants and for refugees, and here, they have many problems in realizing. 
There are exceptions of all personal information.  Also, the immigrants, the refugee, this can be differ from the citizen from the host population, maybe it is  it will be useful and interesting to Mr. some models for our refugees, models of displaced people.  Often it is hard to identify groups and group venue. 
We have no information about previous and current experience to predict the experience of the immigrant and displaced people using the services, and those with language problems. 
I must say technologists and the approaches now, it is I think and my opinion, it is that they have the ability to solve many of those problems.  First of all, I think it is very interesting idea for pulling the data and the exchanging of the different open data between the countries.
Of course it is ideal for the concept of big deal with the Internet services.  Maybe today we can discuss the ability of the technologists too.  I want to finish my short presentation in showing you the question that we, I think, can discuss today.  Today there are a lot of organization, the government  not government, but that can provide services for on displaced people.  We cannot see that all problems are solved.  I think that services must be more personalized, more relevant and also they must be massive in the course.  I want to ask our panelists, too answer this question.
Which services should be provided to the refugees and displaced people?  Who should pay for the development and whose going to provide the services?  Companies, governments, public organizations?
If neighbor countries should develop services together, some joint services in case of disaster to one of the country.  Which is the role of new information technologists and the Internet.
Thank you for your attention in having this discussion.  I want to invite to the discussion one of our organizer, one of our organizers, Mr. Mishra who will do his presentation and report in the remote mode. 
He will tell us about the problems of immigrants in India. 
>> Can you start the presentation, please?
>> Sure.  Are you ready to start that presentation, Mikhail.
>> We're on slide number 1.  Good evening to the nation, a good guy to those that are remotely connected to the meeting. 
It is a pleasure to see professor Audrey Shcherbrovich.  We have never met but it is always a pleasure. 
Here we are, in this workshop, I'll be talking a bit about the utilization of the Internet, refugees, going to utilize the tools and connect in both the home and host country. 
Now, if you move to slide number two, we have seen this quite a lot in India.  We have an immigration, refugee problem.  In fact, in 1970, '71 it was so big it ended in a war between Pakistan and the creation of Bangladesh.  Having said that, if you leave aside the political issues and focus on the people that are displaced, a basic problem they face is  the biggest problem that they don't want to talk to, he or she would be like to be closer to people that know them.  Generally in the refugee camps you see a lot of people that have problems for obvious reasons.  Now, how to understand the local land ways, the local dialect, especially a country like India, there we have 19 national languages, not one, not two, 19. 
Then the government will announce the third aid countries, the aid that's announced, the momentum may move on in countries like in the thirdworld countries and the real aid never reaches  people don't know how much the government has announced and packages for them, Obama sometimes gives money, houses, but they're not available.  I see another big problem, that's education.  Most of the students who are displaced that come as refugees of people, they're doing some education and somehow it is distracted because of things that are not under their control. 
I see these four things as one of the key in where the Internet can really help.  When I say Internet, I'm talking about Internet in general, not talking about, you know, specific websites dedicated to the refugees, because generally it takes time for these things to come up.  You know, you really get  go ahead and slide over to three.
Through the Internet messenger, for example, people can be connected to the near and dear when they actually know what's happening to their properties back home, is somebody taking care of them or is it looted or is  what is happening with that?  They can acknowledge the locals, they cannot only that, but they can get to understand what's being used in the local country or in the host country, they can actually get in touch with the locations, good hospitals.  Okay, here is our problem.  What should we do?  Generally what happens is that the refugees, they  people are  the amount of facilities that come to the people, there's a huge gap between it.
That could be understood from there.  Then the local laws, people may not know that is another piece, that these things are free for everybody, for example, the hospitals may be free.  When that's things happen, even those that don't know the law, they may end up in pain and may end up in hospitals.  Whether it is free, say it may be a dollar, just sign in yourself, that's all, you can get treatments for free.  There are people standing outside of the hospital, so on, telling these people, you know, we can get you  the work done for free.  We can get you a license, we can get you help.  People are able to portray them, at the end of the day, at some point they may be caught, put in jail because of having a fake identity.  And last but not the least people can actually continue education online, especially women and children, all school age, education is really on there.  So, online education is there, even if somebody's displaced from the home country, to the host country, there is lots of courses to do, they can get education, get some jobs because sometimes in countries as big as India it may be better to take more people to go back to their, you know, home country, it is very difficult  we have a lot of people from Bangladesh staying in India, they have not gotten their cards, work permits, they didn't know what X, Y, Z means.  At the end of the day, as a human being, I'm not really concerned about  whatever they're representing, I think they need good advice, they can always go back to another country, the law, to go by the U.N. principles, people should have the basic conditions and should not be butchered.  This is crucial. 
If we can go to the last slide.  I think the Internet, this is a best means to get connected from the home country, the host country.  People really go coat an education on the laws, about the health system, applications, they can actually get the help.  In fact, Nelson Mandela once said food, water, for all.  He said let there be food, water, Internet for all for the good life. 
>> Thank you.  Thank you very much.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: We have questions from the floor, from the remote participants.  Thank you very much. 
Of course we must be  we must do introduction to technology statistics for the problem which we want to discuss today and I want to give the microphone to Mikhail. 
>> Thank you very much, I'll try to be as quick as possible.  From, you know, the technological perspective anyway, I would probably like to  show you the slides, but I would like to emphasize that we're talking about economic development which is based on technological progress and here you can see some basic phases of the progress when we talk about the communications and when we talk about the communications itself. 
I just would like to announce that our technologists, our cellphones,s the most common devices and technology used around the world in terms of services provided using the help of these devices. 
When we're talking refugees and displaced people, you're also already seeing some services provided via cellphones through short message services and cellphones to connect families to check quality and to find medicines outside of the countries, outside of the home countries to inform people about emergencies and disasters.  Even if the high commissioner, he already says that we should change  we should change our policy in terms of obligations that should be provided to refugee, displaced people, we should also provide them Internet and we should provide them with basic services, Google earth, so on. 
So that's where actually the Internet service has come.  We just had a discussion about many things, but it doesn't matter whether we're talking about the things or services, I want to emphasize we're talking data, talking about data and we're talking about data utilization.  We're talking about Internet services, personalized, as it was already announced, so customer, citizens  displaced, people should be at the center and we should provide the services for the people, definitely.  Now in terms of the massive services, we're talking about the different services. 
What I want to say, we're talking about the Internet services as the mechanism which will help us to empower people, empower displaced people, empower immigrants with the services they need based on some applications case by case.  What are we talking about?  Services ready to be used, we  we have many devices around us.  We have many services around us already introduced and not just the informative services but also services on a level of communications, a level of a number of things and make sure that these services, they would be quite useful for the refugees and for the displaced people, but they're not just abducted for them and actually the manufacturers and the service producers, developers, they haven't thought about, you know, these people when they were proposing services.  In terms of government enrollment, from my perspective, we're talking about the government as a policymaker for the application and services and in terms of et cetera, we are talking the government of a developer, for the educational services, government as involved in providing culture and the traditional services, just, you know, infirm active services for the displaced people and those  that's some basic governmental services. 
We have a technology side as a basis.  We have different hardware platforms but we're not talking about just hardware platforms, we're talking about data which is provided by the hardware and software firms.
This data driven services should be introduced to displace people, to help them assimilate in terms of infirm active services like traditions, culture.  In terms of services for the job seeking, for the grants, so on.  Just try to be, you know, as discreet as possible.
Thank you very much.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you, Mikhail.
The organizers and me, we have tried to outline the raw data for discussion and now we must discuss the critical questions.  I think we can start from the first question, which services should be provided to the refugees and displaced people?  I think I will ask some of our panelists to give us their opinion and, first of all, we'll do that and then we'll have the questions from the floor and from our remote participants. 
>> You covered a lot of those.  I would like to add two things to what you said in terms of the basic services that need to be provided. 
I look at it from the angle of  first of all, we need to have up and running infrastructure.  I think we tend to forget that n many cases when we have the refugees, we may not even have Internet connection up and running in those places.  In some cases, even if we have it, it may not be at the scale of supporting hundreds of thousands of people in a very small area.  It was not designed that way.  So, the first thing, the first  I would say the first thing is to have basic infrastructure up and running to support the needs of the population at the right time.  That's a difficult problem to solve.  That's number one. 
Number two, to have the basic services that we talked about.  The services just as  you know, the education, the communication, you know, healthcare and understanding their rights and response and responsibilities and obligations in the country, et cetera.  These are sort of basic services. 
I would argue, we're in the world of innovation, technology, there may be another level of additional services that will be provided by, you know, smart developers that are not in this room but who may understand the needs of these people and may come up with crazy ideas and innovative ideas to support the needs of certain categories of those people. 
I look at it through these three things, you know, basic infrastructure, second thing, basic services, communication, you know, being able to indicate to their parents and to talk to them, being able to understand their obligations and rights and the third pillar, it is really about how do we do it to enable the innovation and bring different services to different people. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you.  Thank you.
ANDRE.  The services that need to be provided, first, I would like to, you have to have the access to the legal protection, access to courts, according to that, this court accessibility, it is the best practices for services which are important to be provided.  First, it should be in the relevant hang.
For people that are foreigners, not knowing  not the good ability of speaking the hang of the country, so the immigration, so, they need to access information, how to get the local attorney, how to  have access to the court service, how to access the refugee migration services on the language they could speak.  That's the first point.
The second point is the other related service, which I think need to be provided, they are a kind of a library or a legal place with the major legal acts for example.  I could see the example of the best practice from Indonesia so when I arrived in the country I filled the immigration form, I'm not a refugee but that's an example.  It is written in red capitals that the drug traffickers are sent to the death penalty here.  That's good to have that kind of information about  to know that coming in the country.  I don't know about the refugees issues with the drug traffic but that's okay.  That's my point of view. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you. 
>> First of all, I have to confess, this is a subject, an area which is not very familiar to me.  Since I was asked by my friends who I met in Paris in February to be here, here I am.
First of all, I think that we are talking about very different groups and types of people.  Talking about migrants and migrants, you know, they can be actually people who are quite well to do, come to Finland to work as NOKIA engineers, and then on the other hand, you have all sorts of migration and they need  we're talking here about a very different thing from each other.  Then, of course, at the other end of the spectrum we talk about refugees, we talk about the displaced persons after some disaster or political crisis maybe living in camps, so on, so forth.  So, they're really very different needs for hierarchy of needs for all these people.  Finland happens to be a country which people used to immigrate from Finland and not so much take immigrants into Finland, now, of course, we have immigrants in the basic policies to integrate them as fast as possible.  That means that the service, the net services, the Web services, they're mostly integrated with whatever agencies there are that provide those services.  They try to integrate them there.
The language, of course, is a problem, Finland has a very difficult language.  The people who come, they have different languages.  Anyway, one of the applications is introduced, the knit web application for language training.  That's a first thing to be able to function in a society.  Yeah, it is true, you want to talk to your home country.  That's  I think that that's mostly actually the telecenters that are ran by the immigrants themselves, they're really springing newspaper various parts of the city, especially where the immigrants are living.  So, that actually provides business opportunities for immigrants that are savvy technology. 
Then at the other end of the scale, we're talking about people living in camps and so on and so forth, I don't know much about that, I saw that on the link provided in this book, they were referencing this, there was a story, I followed the link, I found an organization called refugees united.  What they're doing, they're a good example of how this technology can be used in a novel way, that is to say that it is a tracing, a family tracing service.  One of the problems is, if you're in a camp, displaced somewhere, you lose touch with your relative, sometimes with your children and apparently this service has been  it can actually  it can be accessed even by cellphones now.  It has been of great use for that sort of thing. 
The one thing, if we have time, I could touch on that subject, that is related to this a bit, it is also about the disasters, it is a disaster in which the people of your country happen to be victims of a disaster in a far away place.  I'm talking about the tsunami in Thailand.  We developed some improvised solutions at that time, perhaps that's another story.  I'll come back to that if we still have time.
Thank you. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you very much.  A microphone for you, dear. 
>> AUDIENCE: Thank you very much.  Good afternoon.
Thank you for this invitation, I'm very glad to be here today.  Specifically we  I'm from an organization TaCTogether against cybercrime international and we started to work in the area of what we call vulnerable people but obviously the vulnerable people could be refugees and immigrants as well as defined by the information society.  So, how we arrived actually to this question of vulnerable people in the information society, or how ICTs could assist or better integrate the migrant, the refugees in the society and economic and social life, we mainly work in the area of cybercrimes, cybersecurity protection.
Being in the field, we realize that a target group, the vulnerable group, practically they don't have  they have enough  they don't have enough information, not because of the information not existing, but because they cannot access the information due to the linguistic problems, other problems concerning how to be safe and responsible.  Practically what we realize, they're fragile online, they can be involved in the legal activities and can be easily victims of the cybercrime.  It is how we arrive to this, to the conclusion that we do need to raise the question of how to protect or empower vulnerable people in the information society and launch the discussion two years ago during IGF in Kenya. 
If we  I think the question was which services should be provided to the refugees and displaced people.  It was  the question is about Civil Rights.  We talk about waits they have.  We don't have a simple answer to this.  If we want to summarize into words, we would say the same Human Rights as every human.  It is included and it is written in the universal convention on Human Rights.
First of all, I think it was referenced to a number of times, access to the Internet and information, whatever it is, the information concerning how to be safe and responsible or not online or how to be integrated in the life of the new society. 
Before I  I would like to share our experience particularly concerning migrants.  To speak about the project we have developed with a number of prepare partners at the European level. 
First of all, I think before we speak about services we need to provide, we need also to communicate and raise awareness about the services existence or potential existence of the services of the local authorities who are in direct contact with these people, they deal in the field with these people. 
We need to empower them with the knowledge, you know, that the information society today can bring new opportunities for migrant, you can implement these solutions, the solutions in the field of economic integration, social, cultural integration, how to be safe and responsible online, et cetera, the locals themselves, they're in the aware of the existence of the solutions or the existence of the possibility of the solutions.  What we have done, we have launched a year ago a project that we call the spring, it was mainly developed with ourselves other partners at the European level, it was a youth funded project, we developed a course for local authorities, representatives on how to use  on the better integration of migrants.  So, practically it is an online available course which has five chapters.  The local authorities, representatives, they can follow online and they have an evaluation afterwards, the certificate can be provided so the main idea was to, you know, to raise the attention  to raise the awareness and to bring to their attention the fact that we have solutions in different fields, all fields that were discussed before even concerning the economic and medical, health assistance area with the users.  When they know, the authorities know that the services can be provided, they can implement or help to implement the services and bring them about.  They're in direct contact with them. 
For the moment being my two cents, I would be happy to discuss afterwards.  Thank you.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you. 
 thank you, Yuliya Morenets.  Some questions from our remote  yes?
>> I have a question, the question is, if governments and the Internet is provided to the citizens, who do you suggest fund the strategy and how to put in place this by the request of government?
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: I think it's the next question.  Maybe I can ask to answer this question maybe let's see if other 
>> Thank you.  First of all, on behalf of the  I want to express my gratitude for this, the reason is, the colleagues, they have attached the legal background and the structural background, and this point is becks importance.  This is a  as you have all known, we're having a problem which was almost we had 1 million refugees, and therefore we were having for the last 20 years we have acquired enough experience and best practices on dealing with the issues of refugees and IDPs.  Starting with the experience, to directly answer the question, I know we have a limited time, the services, different camps, they deal with different services.  In Australia they have the refugees cash assistance, they just do it in cash, they do have medical assistance.  We have a specific law, we have dealt with the issues of refugees coming and the IDPs.  We have a low that was even  that was adopted in 1999, a law.  And some specific amendments.  The law provides this kind of specific service for the refugees and they're fluid communication, free healthcare and also the foods, the groceries, then for specific concessions.  The main part of this law is nodded only on normalizing the life of the refugees but making it better than the normal citizens.  They do have  they have been moved from their  from their life they have bitumen on, or their career that they have built on, specific emergency that they went through, they lost their family members.  So, in this case, particularly I guess we won't have time to touch one by one, if it is okay I'll touch all of the questions and just briefly, simply talk about it and the things regarding who will fund it, well, major funding from the government and dale quiet average is over $300 million.  In 2008 it was 300 million and almost the same as the euro.  This fund something all about the building the new ministries for the refugees and IDPs and providing them every single assistant.  Going back to the ICT, if you have a chance to look at the website of the state, it is quite, quite modern.  You can see that there is E services of the government for refugees and really interesting that we found out, some camps, they tried to involve as much as possible Civil Society or private sector for the implementation of the funding of the projects they have gotten, refugee, IDPs but at the end as I indicated, the questions, there is a need of strategy that strategy is the mission that should be backed with a legal background.  League background should be backed by experience.  It is the kind of triangle relationship between them. 
Going back to the issue of the neighbor countries, the national disasters, how they deal with that, this is an example around  so many from around the world.  Most of you know, like, the issue of back to school initiative that was organized and conducted together with Lebanese and Palestinian states and the aim was for providing the refugees, the Lebanon refugees from Syria with major  like main school items in order for them to have it leak into that small infrastructure for them having the education f a perspective of that, they'll actually think, you know, the point is not only normalizing the life of the refugees but trying to make them better than the normal citizens.  The point is to see and to have this balance.  There is one thing when we can't ever reimburse, that's actually their mental things they have gone through.  There is no price for that.  Therefore, actually, when we think about any  preparing any thing for the refugees we have to take that point into account. 
Thank you. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you.  Do we have another question from the remote participants?
>> Yes. 
>> Does the simple iOS require  sorry.  It requires a certain level of information and literacy, but the immigrants and refugees are not often educated enough to use the profile.  May I suggest the possibility of solving this problem?
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Ajay.
>> I'll try to answer that question.  Several periods ago, it was  I was employed with the information for all programs, which is active with the internet Governance forum.  They're raising the issues of information literacy. 
This is a global part of the informational users, those items are interconnected with each other.  It is possible to be the information without the information culture n problem also exists.  When we're talking about, for example, issues called the Arab spring and after that we have the refugees from the Middle East those are revolutions in Arab countries, it was done by using the Internet technologies. 
You know, when they could use Facebook and other applications to make the political regime, I think they could use the Internet technologies more properly for using applications which could save their lives which could save their lives, which could maybe accommodate them to the whole society. 
That would be my answer.
Thank you. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you, Ajay.
I must ask our panelists to maybe refer to it in the answers, in maybe 3, 5 minutes for the answers. 
Have we anymore remote questions?  No?  No? 
>> This is from Fred. 
There was a role played in the increasing situation. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Could you  what was the rule plagued in the increasing of the situation?
>> Inpro  in crisis.  In crisis.  In the crisis situation. 
>> Could the land services play a greater role in the provision of food in crisis situations?
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Okay.
>> It is a question on online services playing a greater role in the provision of food in crisis situations.  You know, food services. 
>> Joining we don't have a simple answer to this question.  For example, just an example, we had an example to work with colleagues from Kenya, and I know in Kenya for example they use the online services like emergency SMEs and other disaster management or in cases of crisis of course this can be a solution because ICTs could bring even the information closer to the population.  Another example actually, I just remembered, we worked with a project, in Latin America the professionals in the agriculture sector, they were receiving actually the SMS via mobile phone which was a mobile service on which products are available, for example, for Syria, you know, maybe you're better about this one than this one.  Of course, we can use it, it is a question of the access to the information which can be easier.  Thank you.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you.
I think we started to discuss the second question. 
I ask for a short presentation.
>> Thank you.  I think we can't continue without some examples, can't help to understand how the mobile technology and Internet will help with this kind of problems.
For example, after the 2010 earthquake in Haiti a research team  I don't know how to say it, but it is an institute, it was a medical school in the Columbia University and they worked together in the developing of the tool that used information from Haiti.  They used this information to talk about how the people was moving inside a country before  during a  after the earthquake, the disaster and they provide  the information, to the humanitarian agencies with updates on the population movementS and this information, it was very useful for the authorities and for these organizations to allocate resources more efficiently. 
So, for  I think that's sometimes when we have a natural disaster for example the lack of information and where the people is moving inside of a country or in our region makes them the most vulnerable group because there is relief organizations that they don't know exactly where the people is looking and how to deliver the right amounts of supplies for the right places.  This is a huge concern for a discount of different organizations.  In this case, the Universities are using it for the information available in the mobile networks to provide this kind of information to this different organization.  The other great example is that we called it Australia  the responses there.  It was an example of when we have  we have a disaster, an earthquake, another kind of disaster, for example, a massive flood that happened in India in July this year, thousands of people were displaced from their own homes.  When we have technology, we can use or create a crisis app with route information and the localization of the relief cams, the medical centers, food supply for the people that was trying to find information about this.  So, for example, we can use the technology to find people during the disasters and we can use tools like that, a person can find the Web application to allow to post and search for the relatives and friends effected by the disaster.  So, this is only two examples of that, how we can use the information on the platforms to provide good services for refugees, or displaced people, for immigrants, I think that we have the tools and the challenge is how we're going to innovate, create new tools that will be helpful for everybody.  I think that I went  only two ideas, we need open platforms and open data to create these skills.  If we have  if we don't have access to the information, it is going to be very difficult to innovate and create new alternatives, new tools for displaced people or for immigrants. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you. 
I want to ask 
>> On the question  I think the question is who pays?  Right?  Whose funding?
I think didn't way I look at it, it is a combination of, you know, it is sort of public partner, private/public partnerships.  Government has a role to play, private sector has a role to play, I think NGOs have a role to play.  I would argue that even, you know, as we mentioned and will probably go to that later on, we have the discussion about, you know, the new innovator also come in and, you know, like others that can come and build new stuff based on the existing infrastructure.  The governments had have a role to play, they have the infrastructure, they own T they have a role to play.  The private sector has a role to play we have seen in the crisis that prevention, you know, the organizations such as, you know, Google, Microsoft, others have dealt with the applications, put them in there and will continue to do so.  There are many participating in this.  I think NGOs have a role to play as well in that. 
They understand the issues, they're core to the issues.  People that are in health, food, Human Rights, they understand those things better than anyone else.  They may have a funding mechanism to support, it is a combination of those things.
The fundamental issue which was just mentioned, if we don't have open data that's provided by, you know, governments, by private  even some private sector, that's out there, we cannot be innovative and create things, you know, in the situation of emergency.  These are things that are not important before emergency and in many cases they're developed with the urgency, so, we 24 hours to react.  Initially what are you talking about?  Being building the applications, innovations in the matter of 24 hours, 48 hours to react very quickly to address that specific problem that we're facing.  In this case, you know, corporation is important  cooperation is important, not just somebody fixing it but how, do we work together between public sector, public sector government and NGOs, industries, whatever, as a group to you say no problem.  Two, how do we have the data  people with the data, they ever to put it on the table to go fast and innovate.  This is very, very punt mental into the process.  So, funding is the multistakeholder but the collaboration is there as well. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you very much.  Maybe you want some words?
>> I would like to make a quick remark.  The question of the moderator, I know that  we already mentioned this, but I want to  a quick example, it is a good example, today, I'm wondering if there is a negative, a possible consequences, two years ago there was a earthquake in turkey taking more than 300 lives in one night.  Why I'm mentioning these specific examples is they all  the online campaign it commends, within a week, they're collecting more than the amount of money that government made a month later as a support to the one.  This is a good example of how actually processing the line, helping them to assess the relief to use up their ICT and how the special network is even sometimes more powerful than others.  Thank you.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: We'll move to the third question.
If the neighbor countries develop servicing it in case of a disaster in one of the countries, I would like to possibly sit down and discussion and to discuss with Roxana.
I ask you to use two, flee minute.
>> Just would like to make two points.  Then the question is depends on the points context and it is great to have the cooperation.  I'm afraid it is not possible in all of the cases and if the people are displaced by the water conditions, that's impossible as we know.  The development of joint service Coss be done, however, on platforms that would be available for sharing codes and could be implemented outside of the conditions of political tensions if we use open source code, trying to intergrade the community working in a different way.  That may be hard to achieve.
I want to make two points.  One is on the target groups we're looking at.  In this case I think we want to look at not only the temporary conditions in which the groups are placed but also at the longterm implications, what's it mean to be a forced migrant or displaced pepper in a country?  What's that mean for the rest of your life?  So, if you take the concept of vulnerability in the longterm, we observed beyond the language difficulty and the literature rates they face poverty and aggravation to the other cultural norms and the transition will make it very difficult for them to move on with their lives, the discrimination, the inequality, the social exclusion, if you think long term I think we need to add another layer to this differentiation of the service, we have to have some empowerment services, longterm these people need more than just the temporary intervention, in this case, maybe we should also think of just empowerment possible.  Thank you  possibility.  Thank you.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you.  Two minutes, not more. 
>> Thank you.  There are also two points  not the same reached by Roxana.  The first major point, it is the relation towards the convention. 
There is the major document adopted by the United Nations as you know in 1951.  Really all states are the members of the convention but the application of this application is different and  different from state to state. 
One of the best practices of developing these services of providing real kinds of rides for the refugees, the migrants, it is not shown by the states.  They're shown by the enter governmental organizations led by the United Nations and led by the United Nations commissioner on refugees.  Under that, under the services, of what developed, the services related to also fulfilling the basic needs, improving the living conditions, also those services are related for education, for cultural and for fulfilling cultural needs.  I could remember that the convention provides a wide specter over the Human Rights.  We should be guaranteed for the refugees.  They should be not only basic rights bone should be a rightful for the normal conditions, even for the development of the rights, of the intellectual properties and this kind of rights. 
The best practice I show not by states but for  but by the intergovernmental.  Just one more minute.
The other question is the question between the states. 
Our relation between the states.  They're sometimes not so good to develop joint services.  Thank you. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you.
We have a question from the floor, two questions.  I think the examples you give are great.  I wonder if you have any examples of governments misusing this information, intercepting 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Louder.
>> AUDIENCE: The examples are great but I wonder if you have evidence of governments misusing that information to stop the immigration flows or to, you know, block the financial transactions from the  back to the immigration camps or the refugee camps because if it is all open data, it could be misused. 
>> ROXANA RADU: If I may, actually   this is linked to the same question.  I was going to ask in the same vein.  Honestly I did the title of today's topic, I thought, okay, great, this is probably speaking about migration, about immigration, about internally displaced persons, I will be honest saying I'm quite surprised that it doesn't touch on as much as I expected it would.
Perhaps if I could pose to the panel a situation, I'm from South Africa, and the phenomena that happened a few years ago, I think it was 2008 in South Africa, where we had the largest number of internally displaced migrants which was unprecedented in the refugees, what is it?  The UMHCI.  Sorry, they get to me.
Yeah, just to actually put to the panel, sometimes many of the persons, the IDPs, the refugees, they don't want the personal information shared, governments can use that information and lady luck can shift that information when coming to this country and given the internal race relations in politics and now you have a group of persons coming in from the continent, we had black on back violent because they were immigrant communities of the same skin color as our locals. 
Working at the Human Rights commission people would come to us, we had thousands in one night we recollect worked two days straight until 4:00 in the morning.  Just to get these people's names, just to be  they didn't trust any other agencies besides you and Human Rights commission. 
I want to put to the panel if that was happening today, what technologies are out there, what could be done to have averted something of greater violence or a mechanism in place to address that sort of issue and gaining trust with the persons at the same time.  Thank you. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: I think we have to answer that third and fourth question.  About the technologists and also about the  yes.  Yes.  Who will answer, who will answer those questions?
>> I want to make sure  it is not  it is because you asked for  it is the misuse of this, I wanted to before bring that example to the table, I recently had an occasion to work on the development of the interception of communication legislation, so, practically, after the government example, after the end of the crisis, the disaster they had, they developed online services to emergency, to get the access to the information.  The point is, they don't have any legislation for the moment in the information society.  They don't have the legislation or the information society.  Any framework, including the cybercrime, more or less it is ready.  My answer would be I'll not bring you the example, but I may be  bilaterally I could give you a number of them  I would say, you now, when we speak about  when we speak about the solutions, we need also not to forget about the legal part and the need for the legal framework because if we see today we don't have the framework, which underlines marginalized communities or links, the marginalized communities and the ICTs, the information society.  Thank you. 
>> Roxana, maybe you have some words. 
>> ROXANA RADU: I wouldn't be able to answer what technologies are right now available.  I can pass the microphone on. 
I guess in terms of the data protection I'm sure there is much more to be done in this sphere and the problem with emergency services is that everything happens so fast.  The collection of information is also very fast. 
With the recent management of a system to manage that information in place or not, that depends on the local capacity and could be probably handled relatively easy with some sort of encryption out.  I would throw it back at you, maybe you can give us more answers regarding what can be done technologically. 
>> There are a lot of technologies involved in the market, when I look at how  what sort of technologies are available today that can be used in cases of emergency we're thinking about cloud computing which obviously has huge power in terms of being able to do large scale things in a very fast, you know, time.  In a more secure way.  That's one thing that's usually a powerful set of technologies available on the market.
The other thing is, you know, other technologies that needs to be used to some extent, they're, you know, how do you use social networks, social networking technologies to support  you know, the  those crisis, it is very powerful. 
Technologies such as, you know, the voice, the voice override, that's another set of technologies because this has been encrypted, it is out  usually it is out of the  based on the Internet, fast, you can use any device, et cetera, et cetera, so, technology is  that's just a few examples of how technology, specific technologies can be used to address the problem.
The reality is I think there are two elements.
One, countries today, they have to be prepared.  They have to be prepared and they have to put in place, you know, frameworks, legal frameworks and policies.  They have to put in place technology infrastructure and even processes and prepare their own people to the issues of, you know, emergency response, disaster management, those kinds of things.  We will  we don't know how it will happen public awareness it could happen internally, externally, we have to be prepared, not wait for the disaster and address the problem differently, that's number one.  Number two, I think technology is going to keep evolving and providing opportunities for new scenarios, new solutions, new things to do.  We should not prevent ourselves from using the latest technologies.  Interestingly, when I see what's happened in the last two years, how the industry has been able to react very fast by using the latest technologies like the new mapping tools, big data, cloud computing, et cetera, it has been very innovative, very inspiring actually to see how people get them to use the latest, et cetera.  I want  I'm optimistic, you can see, I'm optimistic on how, you know, developers can come up with the right ideas and use the latest.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Yes?
>> Only one comment.  It is very aligned with this, with what you said.  It is only I wanted to highlight we need to  we have all of this innovation to create this kind of tools, to support the people that need its help.  Initially we need a by law and will see the legislation between the protection of the SPCI and the development of the new technologies.  It is a challenge for the religious leader Pace, for the global readers in our country, I think we need to follow general principal Pace, for example, in the privacy, I think we need  we need to create a violation for every tool that is developed that we use in that technology, we have general principals of protection of Human Rights, constitutions rain other countries, so, the post important thing is we need to create this balance and innovation and to tag the human value and in general principles. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you. 
>> Thank you.  I promised to say a couple of words about the tsunami, 2004 which was in  not very far from here.
Of course, 178 things died in that tsunami, they were holidaying in Thailand at that time.  Of course, I'm on a machine talking about that, I know in Indonesia, they LOST so many in tens of thousands of people.  Anyway, as an example, the bad news was, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs which was working at the time, we had a grand new software precisely this purpose, for, you know, getting information, looking at people that are missing, so on, so forth, it is bad news, however, that nobody had been train  had been trained to use it.  That meant that if it was unusable in that situation and people had to literally go back to  they had to go back to paper and pen. 
However, a good example wasn't that we were able to improvise something in those, during those days, needless to say that the airline organized a organization flight.  When we relayed this information, we were able to get everybody together, the operators, the authorities, agencies, so on, so forth, we decided to accepted a text messages, an SMS to all phones in Thailand that were connected to the operators from Finland.  They did those text messages telling the FBIs all  fins  all of this had had mobile phones to go to specific place, to use words where they're evacuated.  That was successful.
One thing for tsunami, everybody who had mobile phones, if they were  if there was any connectivity, they were informing their friend and relatives immediately in Finland.  A tremendous flow of information.
Back to Finland, immediately on Sunday  there were people in Finland separated that knew all about this, however at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs we were not apart of that information flow and didn't know anything for a full day.  For a full day we thought a not one person had been punished, he gave us 174, so, applications that could somehow arena using some media, that would make that sort of information available, a pool, that can be agria gated which would be successful for the disaster situations.
>> Thank you. 
>> First of all, thank you.  The lady from Africa, a real challenging question, as well as from the audience.
The case about it, the real good precedence of this, the genocide, '94 in April, at that time the government was able to disguise the information for a while and there were other issues regarding what happened that many U.N. had GOP to council, by the cases in the weather, it is the extent of the ICT and success of civilians and the tourists and journalists to the most contemporary ICT gadgets, it is a bit difficult to stage two, to look at that information and the good examples is, today, Syria, what's happening there.  We have different pictures on one hand and the other hand.  Thank you.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you very much.  We have some questions from the remote participants.  A lot of questions, yes?  One question and I'm sorry, we're ten minutes late?  Is it okay for the panelists, five more minutes?  Is it okay?  Just a question from the remote participant. 
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: It is important to speak with the remote participants. 
>> The question from Travis.  Following the earthquake in Haiti, crime and violence increased dramatically especially against vulnerable groups.
My question is, would the panel comment on the use of the Internet technologies like that created in Columbia University to provide better security for domestic and displaced populations through these technologists?
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: I think you must answer this question.
>> In terms of the Internet technologies for crime and violence after the earthquake, the most important thing, if you're talking about the Internet technologies helping to  let's say to decrease the levels, to prevent the increasing level of crime or violence, the services should be established before any disasters.  That's what we actually mentioned in terms of providing services before the disaster in order to help.  The services, like the physician services, the services for technologists, for personal belongings, probably some  let's say violence services and establishing the infrastructure as it was noticed, you know, at the beginning, then I think, yeah T would help, it would definitely help to prevent, you know, increasing of a crime and the violence even after a disaster, even before the disaster, right. 
So, in terms of conclusions, and summarizing the workshop, it is really nice that all of the panelists made  made it finally.  We have such a  a great panel.  Then quite fruitful discussion here. 
I would like to thank you and in terms of summarizing and conclusions, I would like to put  you know, some several points.
First of all, talking about services for displaced people or immigrants, think about infrastructure and whose doing it or if it already exists, talking about a particular country, of course, as mentioned in the beginning, then some basic services from technologically sides, that perspective should be introduced, some information technology, right. 
Then services, which we're talking about, should be relevant, and relevance is  they should be related to the  they should be massive and provided in a relevant language which is quite important.  There should be a legal database to implement the services.  You know, legal aspects depends on particular countries. 
Another thing, in terms of some basic services, it is quite important to  as some panelists admitted, it is quite important to develop services under some legal aspects in terms of family tracing, even if the service is helpful, there should be some legal aspects for that.
There should be special services for pro detection of displaced people, immigrants, information society so how they should interact, how they should work online.  They should be having the work done with the local authorities.  In terms of the mechanisms, how they should be spread, the services, so, it should be studied case by case, but some basic services like, you know, education, should be free, healthcare, should be free, some probably basic services according to the convention.  As it was noticed, there should be strategy with legal ground to support the displaced people and refugees and the immigrants through the services. 
The services, the development of the services should be based on open date and platform concept and approach.  Which is necessary and which reaches the necessity in terms of providing them globally. 
As it was, yeah, again, just to emphasize, the important services, they should be related to the convention in terms of the applications for some particular, you know, countries. 
Yeah.  If you're talking about  about basic rules, there should be basic privacy so just ordinary general data protection rule for all the services independent, you know, results of developing some special cases for the particular service. 
In terms of  so, I do hope that actually we'll be able to continue discussion along this issue as mentioned here as a multistakeholder approach, you know, which is actually, you know, a multistakeholder approach which is necessary in order to be able to implement, you know, what we're talking about here.  Thank you very much.
>> AUDREY SHCHERBOVICH: Thank you very much, Mikhail.
I want to thank you for the participants.  The time was very short for the discussion of this very important and I think multiaspect problem.  A problem that is connected with different aspects of policy, of technologists.  I think that we have good prospects to discuss more about these problems and about this prospects maybe next year, we have good plans, good prospects and I think it will be great to make new meeting in new place and to discuss all those problems.  Thank you very much.  Thank you for your participation. 
[Applause]
(This text is provided as a realtime service and is not to be copied from any live event.  Please contact Caption First if you would like to receive a properly formatted transcript of this event.) 
 NATION 
IN INTERNET GOVERNANCE
WS 145
Nusa Dua Hall 1
 

The following is the output of the real-time captioning taken during the Eigth Meeting of the IGF, in Bali, Indonesia. Although it is largely accurate, in some cases it may be incomplete or inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to understanding the proceedings at the session, but should not be treated as an authoritative record.

 
 
 
Raw transcript.
This transcript, or any portion thereof, is not for publishing, quoting, external distribution, online posting or any other similar use.
Eighth Internet Governance Forum.
Importance of Regional Coordination in Internet Governance.
>> If you're not workshop I encourage you to join us at the table because if you have interactions you are able to freely participate.  Before we call our workshop to order if we could check that the transcripts are functioning?
Excellent.
>> A very good morning to everyone, we aring in day 3 of the IGF workshop and we welcome you to workshop 145, Importance of Regional Coordination in Internet Governance.  My name is Sala Tamakikaiwaimaro and I will be moderating and we have panelists from diverse stakeholders groups and bringing the level of expertise.  And we also are looking forward to dynamic interaction from the floor this is what it's all about and what we will be doing essentially is we will be looking into practical and tangible illustrations of actual exams of enhancemented cooperation between diverse stakeholders groups.  And we know that this year, this year's IGF and Hans Corporation is a key theme running through all the workshops.  Enhanced corporation.  And many discussions in terms of challenges and many fears in terms of protection of territorial spaces and fears of encroaching over each person's turf.  But what we hope to do in this particular panel, clear examples of enhanced cooperation.
With that I like to welcome our first Panelists, Nnenna Nwakanma.  So Nnenna?
>> NNENNA NWAKANMA: Hi, people.  Did we agree I was going to speak first?  Oh, my goodness.
All right.  I think Sala got me.  I promise I will be speaking on one or two things.  I recall in Dubai during the time during the war conference on International telecommunications, somebody said why do we need to define a twoletter word?  Enhanced cooperation?  I will ask you that question:  Why do you need no define enhanced cooperation and what you get out of it?  But in this session we are talking about the need for coordination and I am speaking coming from Africa.
My national IGF it's called  devore  the.
[ Speaking French ]
>> NNENNA NWAKANMA: That's in French.  Ivory Coast.  I am also parts of the West Africa IGF.
West Africa is the Western part of Africa made up of 15 countries and I am also part of the Africa IGF which is the continental or we can say the regional forum in Africa.  As we move through the national, subregional and regional there are different models of coordination.
In the  IGF, we have a President, and a national forum with the secretariat.
They do trainings and that's one reason why IGF is best at its national level.
Actually there's a number of you can call and someone will pick up that number at national level.
Where you come to the West Africa level now things get a bit complicated because in West Africa alone, we have three Official languages.  We speak, English, French and Portuguese.  So and so it is a challenge to be able to coordinate 15 countries that are in  Africa is 350 million in population announcements of at that level the coordination is done by a consortium of different stakeholders.  And that is a model we are going to discuss later on here.
And a consortium is led by the free software and open source for Africa and.  For the moment what West Africa IGF has a consortium of seven organizations.
At the Africa level we have a secretariat.
That not  staffed Secretariat.  We just know that the Secretariat is lodged at the United Nations Commission for Africa and it's supported by the EU Africa Union Commission.
Now how does this play out in reality?
All of that I have said are institutional arrangements.
But we still know it's individuals that make things happen.
So what happens is that at every level you will notice that someone is a person that takes care of it.  Inas much  Africa is blessed to be one block of land that makes up the continent and a few islands.  And that really makes things easier.  And for those who do not know, the African Union that used to be the Organization of African Unity is one the oldest multigovernmental organizations that exists and this has helped the AU to have Africa subdivided in subRegions and you find out in Africa  the subject of  the same subregional  well, classification of the continent.  Now, for each of these we still have subregional economic commissions.  So for West Africa we have the economic Commissioner of West African states and that's like the International interstate organization we liaise with.  Northern Africa we have another organization.  So the way Africa is structured allows for coordination; it allows for interaction; and institutional  partnerships.
Let me end here by talking to you about what we call the A  Stars it begins with an "A" and "F" and a wildcard.  What are AF Stars?  AF Stars in the framework of Internet governance working and collaborating together.  The first AF Star is called  you do an AF and you add relic and you know that's unique for Africa.  The second AF Star is network operators group.  And there's African, which is the Africa, ICANN group.  And the Africa Internet Governance.  And there's FLTD, which is the Africa regional organization.  There's AF Nick  organization for at the national level.
There's  the Africa school of Internet Governance.
And there's the Africa ICT Alliance.
And a whole lot of AF Stars coming up.  So all of these come together in many sectors.  So you have about the same actors, technical academic, Civil Society, international organizations around AF Stars.  And it was wonderful for us to above met in Zambia earlier in year in the Africa Internet Summit, which was coorganized by all the AF Stars.  As we leave here I like you to note the next Africa Internet Summit, AIS or whatever you want to call it, will be happening in Djibouti while the Djibouti guy was inviting to us next year no African Summit he said something important.  He said in Djibouti you have the Devil's Island.  You think you are strong and you have gone wireless and you have cables and we need to you come to the Devil's Island sometime next year during the Summit organized by AF Stars and African Internet governance and you are all invited to this coordinated continent that God has blessed.  Thank you.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you and that was Nnenna Nwakanma from the open source  stakeholders within the African continent.  Our next Panelist is Oscar Robles from Mexico.  And he's from the Latin America and Caribbean Region and welcome, Oscar appreciate your thoughts.
>> OSCAR ROBLES: Thank you.
I will mention some examples of  corporation.  And aside from Latin America and the Caribbean, I have been involved in some regional initiatives like Latin immigration.  Coming here as a LAC board member.  Let me tell you the story of the enhanced corporation in the late '90s and I tell you later why this is important.  In the late '90s, the region didn't have a regional IP registry.  There were very few players in the moment.  There were only economic networks and maybe some CDC D studies used to be part of the economic networks as well.
So we tried to part of this regional input registries since the early '90s, but there was no successful effort until there were several other actors like the ISPs and the telecom operators.
So in the late '90s, this more diverse players came into the scene, and then to the table and finally we come up with some agreement and in 20012002 we got this  with ICANN.  Finally we have the regional input registry.  And that's been part of the successful story scene in the region, because NIC is not only in the region, that's one important part of the NIC, but only a smart part of the contribution of the IP registry has come to the region.
We have had a lot of players into the  this meetings and forums and like Nnenna was telling us, we have been witnessed the creation of several other organizations in the region.  This LC Stars or LAC Stars, the fellows from Africa.
We have been watching and witnessing the creation of  as well.  Regional organization.
We have been watching the creation of LAC I X the Internet change points in the region that's more recently.
LAC NOC and other efforts like the preIGF in the region.
Together, LAC NIC has made the effort to bring government actors, government players to this meetings.  And it's been, like, ten years of events and 20 events, talking about the Internet challenges churn current and future and that's certainly helped to create a very good string in the region and understanding of these issues in different forums.  Not only the technical community, but also the government officials that have attended all the these events, the LAC NIC events and the LAC IE X events, regional IGF et cetera.
This is just the beginning.  I think this is a very important effort, not only as I was mentioning the operational IP location and the region, but also the other activities that have come into this event.  Thank you.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you.  Oscar.
What we have clearly heard is it's very interesting, hearing the African context and looking at the AfriStars and  and Africa is pretty well coordinated like the Caribbean Latin region in terms of how they sort of meet annually so discuss strategies and collaboration.  It's interesting to hear Oscar and have him talk about the some of the tangible examples like are the setting up of LAC NIC and exchange points.  We will dive still into the Latin America Caribbean Region I have the privilege of introducing Bernadette Lewis and she will be expressing her perspective on enhanced cooperation with a focus on Intergovernmental.  So Bernadette?
>> BERNADETTE LEWIS: Thank you, Chair.  Just by a way of introduction I like to say the Latin America Caribbean  the policy instrument or the policy institution for the telecommunications sector.
But given the rapid evolution of technology, and the growth of the Internet, in 2004, we expanded the membership of the Caribbean Telecommunications Union to include private sector organizations, Civil Society, members of the academics fraternity, in addition to nontraditional, the other Caribbean countries that were not traditionally part of the Caribbean community.
In so doing we created a multistakeholder organization.  And that has been very effective in enabling us to do  to fulfill our mandate.  One of the mandates of the CGU is coordination and we work with many organizations, many stakeholders, to ensure that or to encourage pooling of resources, sharing of information, making the best use of what the resources that we have available to us.
And I will give you one very  couple of examples.  But certainly one of them is that we started actually, sharing our annual agenda with the International Telecommunications Union Caribbean Office.  So we share our agendas.  We look at activities that are similar, and we actually blend the activities so in the area of spectrum, we have recognized the IGFU was doing a number of programs the CTU was doing a number of programs in Spectrum.  We have been able to blend the activities so that when you put them together, there's a progression and you can see a thread of development in a particular line.
And if we don't do that, if we don't attempt to bring organizations together, what you have is a scattershotof activities that do not bear any reference one with the other.  And it does not contribute to meaningful development and meaningful advancement.  So in blending agendas with organizations we are able to build on the work that's happening and realize a progression that makes sense for the region.
I also wanted to point out that it's our perspective is that no single organization can do the work that is necessary if we are going to support our member countries in their migration to information societies.
So that we work in strategic partnerships, and cooperate with many organizations, such as LAC NIC, Packet Clearing House.  We have these relationships, these cooperative relationships that enable us to do our work and we have found that by cooperating with these organizations the quality of our work is enhanced.  Because it represents the broader view of the collective community.
And this, our philosophy in terms of coordination, we are going to be expanding it with other organizations and sharing and blending agendas so that we make use of very  the effective use of the limited resources and also that we see a meaningful advancement.
That's it, thank you.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Bernadette.
Next up, we have Musab Abdulla from the kingdom of Bahrain on the experience of effective cooperation.  Musab?
>> Thank you very much I am from the kingdom  the regulator for more specifically and after those first speakers it's going to be very tough acts to follow.
The fact of the matter is that regional, in the Arab region we break down to two broad regional groups, if you will.  First is the Gulf Cooperation Council the GCC.  Kuwait, Bahrain  22 Arab countries  historically coordination across the region has been strong and we reap the benefits in many different areas.  When we come to the topic of Internet Governance, rely in some areas we are perhaps lag behind a little bit.  And that includes some of the the coordination and the communication between the government organizations and the nongovernment organizations.  So that end, within the last couple of years, the Arab IGF has been established to actually form the platform for this enhanced cooperation.  That said it's been a fairly recent phenomenon about the need for coordination at the policy level.
Generally, countries tends to just communicate with each other their policy levels.  But the crux, or the focus of the coordination has been primarily at the technical level.
And we have actually made excellent inroads and excellent progress particularly with, for example, our relationship with the RIPE NCC, which is Our RIR.
And the  it has been become apparent over the last year or so there's a need for little extra work and effort tying together the diverse elements within the region.
So while it is a work in progress, for sure we can say that the work is picking.  We are making excellent inroads.  And hopefully, we want to coordinate not only within our region, but across regions to make sure that we leverage each other's experience, because ultimately there's no sense in reworking what has already been done.  I think I will give my panelists a chance to interject.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Musab.  Next Panelist is streaming in from Japan and she is Yurie Ito.  She is the director of Global coordination and APCERT.  If she is able to start speaking?  Yurie, could you say hello just to test?
Not really.  If I could ask the guys to turn up the audio a little bit so the room can hear her?  Speak again, Yurie?
>> YURIE ITO: Good morning.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Can you all hear her?  Go ahead, Yurie.
>> YURIE ITO: Hi, good morning.
Thank you very much for having me.  I'm sorry I couldn't make it there physically.
Now, I was there in the beginning of the week, but now I am back to  I am calling you from  my name is Yurie Ito.  I plan to make my remarks based on my perspectives on what we are doing for the  operational communities.  How APCERT  work together in AsiaPacific Region.
And contribute to  area.
Is to share how we are doing.
And Internet Governance as well.
Today I am specifically presenting the APCERT in the AsiaPacific Region.
Do you have a slide in front of you?
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Yes, Yurie.
>> YURIE ITO: Okay, good.  So I will share how we overcome the challenges and have kept the closely working together to make the Internet cleaner and safer and reliable space through managing the regional level.
And just to before I am starting just to clarify, when I am talking about and saying, saying cyberspace cleaner and healthier title talking about  but the  which consists of Internet infrastructure, such as interconnect servers and devices.  AsiaPacific start focused on making those devices and services cleaner and healthier.  Next slide.  This is about the general introduction about AsiaPacific.
We were established in 2003 so it's been ten years since AsiaPacific was established and we have 26 teams from 19 economies today working together closely.  Of course, you know all of the  International  buildings trust  not easy.
There are, of course, significant differences in political systems and  infrastructure, and  difference.  And each team also had different authorities.
So our remediation approach has been dealing with the  can be very different.
Next slide, please.
This is just a list of the countries, economies, and CERT teams from the economies.
It's very covering from the region.
I feel we have generally successfully overcome all those significant differences and  work together as one big team.  I would like to highlight a couple you have key points that have enabled us to achieve that success.
Which is a common goal, which is to set the common goals in this production approach.
Next slide, please.
I would like to initially touch upon the evolution of the CERT community, how those started and how international  relation starting.  Very fast start is 1989  to early 2000  CERT in place very technical expertise.  Like Government research and universities.  CERTs  so the very first global collaboration of Forum is called  which is established in 1990.
And then the region, regional one there's TF, which is the first regional level of  collaboration for  which was established in 2000.  Three years later, we have AP  gaining momentum today.  Corporation OECD  developing function.  And also GC search, OAS, each region has CERT collaboration forum.
Now over the past 20 years, with the evolution global Internet services  involved as well, cyberspace hasbeenbecome a major national security issue.  These national CERTs  supplanted by national security.  Next slide.
So this is  I will touch a little bit about what type of challenges we are facing.
So with the technology  rapidly evolved we start seeing targeted  attacks or globally.  And we see increasing number of creating national security  attacks such as Stuxnet and Government and 
Governments start discussing on cyberwar  and around the world, governments are making accusations and taking sides  creating risks.  So quickly managing cyberspace and cybersecurity is being seen as a  and that actually challenged creating substantial challenges for CERT in technical community pursuing the pursue of international collaboration.
But next slide, please.
APCERT has turned the challenge into an opportunity.  The challenge was, of course, competitive approach the involvement of the international  organization, potentially breakdown in trust.
CERT and technical community, we were seen as instrument of the state  condition.  So it's getting a little difficult, but we APCERT actually turned in challenge is to an opportunity.
We walk  cybersecurity concerns through many programs.  Such as listing here.  And cybersecurity exercise, cleanup programs, awareness campaign, partnership with the other regional CERT forums.  We are out there in developed and training, building support through the other regions.
And shared network monitoring system and so on.
We provide trust  point of contact for technical hotline between the mechanics and also participate in dialogues and risk reduction norms.  Including, the participating  AP  like a regional forums like AP Star and NIC and we share how we see the situation challenges and  the national dialogue in the region.
Next slide, please.
So APCERT has established its primary goal of making the Internet system cleaner and healthier going through cybersecurity in the AsiaPacific.  As a mutual benefit for all parties using cyberspace.  We are focused on cleanup malware and removing botnets.  And with that way, we can set the common goal and making us work all together.
So I would skip next slide.
Slide 8, 9, 10.
Going to the page 10.  Just as, I think, the very important key factor of the successful International Cooperation on cybersecurity Space.  APCERT turned its focus from security to international risk reduction and dealing with the cyberspace challenges is part of improving the global environment.  We believe we can identify the common goals, for mutual benefit in the longterm and we believe such a focus on healthier cleaner cyberspace the success factor in achieving global  collaboration.  So we are very keen on collaborating all the stakeholders in the region to make cyberspace a safer, cleaner and more reliable.
Thank you very much.  That's all from me. 
[ Applause ]
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Yurie.  We really were appreciate your streaming in.  And please stay online because we will be having interaction shortly after.
I have the privilege of introducing Sally Costerton of ICANN who will be talking about some practical experiences from their perspective.  Sally?
>> SALLY COSTERTON: Thank you very much for inviting me to be parts of group.  I lead stakeholders engagement at ICANN around the world.  And our mission, I think, it's fair to say is ambition, which is to try to work with all our stakeholders around the world, ultimately so that everybody who's lives and work are affected by what ICANN does.  Our aware that we exist and their rights ands responsible and responsibilities to subtract with ICANN if they want it to.  That's very ambitious and we organize it and globally and regionally.  In my experience, implementation really is a regional.  Yes, you can build a website globally, but pretty much everything else is as somebody said earlier is in the end done by individuals, by real people, in countries collaborating together to solve problems.
And much of what we do in ICANN and engagement is about solving problems.  And about providing different kinds of resource to help groups to do their work.  That could be money, sometimes.  So travel support, for example.
It could be people and increasingly it is people.
I am going to spend a bit more time on that.  It could be providing events, where we can bring people together.  And to support many of the organizations that people on this panel represent, and many of you in the room represent.
We have done a lot of in this area, in the last 12 months.  I think if I am honest, ICANN has always been very committed to regional engagement and outreach and has established very strong relationships with many major regional organizations that are involved in Internet governance, of varying different types over the years.
But it's really been my privilege in the last year to have, perhaps, the greater strategic priority by ICANN's leadership on internationalizing ICANN by which we mean expanding out of its traditional U.S. footprint of the  some of you may be aware of that we have expanded into three negotiable hubs so the hub has been split into three so we now have, Los Angeles supporting  North America Istanbul  and that's three very much about coordination offices there to help to provide support in different areas compliance, legal, but also things like communications, events management, many things relevant to the discussions we have had already here this morning.  In addition to that, I have working with me at the moment, eight Vice Presidentlevel engagement leads.
Based all around the world.
They are building strong community groups around them.
In the form of working  very much about very much about enhanced cooperation building plants in different regional groupings with crossstakeholder groups.  Implementation  really, around engagement, around outreach, around capacity building.  And the role of the ICANN VP in this is very much about making sure that as I say that communities can get its work done trying help it where it needs help.  And, of course, representing in many cases a very specific remit around the names and numbers portfolio that ICANN very specifically holds.  Those eight people are some of them are here, many of you will know some or all of them.
And I hope that if you don't, and you would like to rto know more about how ICANN engages in your region, please either come to me or email me and I can connect you to the right person.  Having said that human beings do much of the work and they do also how they behave is very important.  This collaboration point is so key.  I came out of the corporate world.  I have been world in ICANN for about 18 months and one the things incame in with is experience with hiring people and looking for the very best talent.  And in this world, we are looking for people with a very collaborative mindset.  Who have very good emotional intelligence.  You know, who can empathize with what other people need and they do not have an arrogant selfish perspective.  And this is very key and this has been very important in terms of my thinking and our thinking, and that of our CEO, who many of you have seen in action this week.  He's hard to miss.  In terms of bringing together that group with a very strong mission to be supportive and to be helpful.
We have expanded our not just the regional working groups  Civil Society, the technical community, and the academics community, but also coordinating as you have mentioned on this panel already at the regional layer with the existing many existing regional groups that are represented here.  And I hope that we are opening the doors to ICANN in a way we are inviting people to come in.
I am trying to very hard to make of our resources as available and as understandable to as many in the community as I can.
And I am happy to say that I have experienced in my team experienced tremendous partnership in this community of.  Tremendous shared ambition to prove the way we collectively try to solve these complex problems in the Internet Governance space how we manage the precious shared resource, but I think we are making great progress.
In a wider remit, the broader challenge that also faces us is how do we manage the expansion of our communities?  Both ICANNspecific community, and our broader Internet Community?  And that's both with people but also with tools and platforms.
And I would ask if any of you are interested in this we are running some very pioneering web development spaces called under a brand  a web area called ICANN Labs.  And if you are interested in that kind of area, please do go and have a look at ICANN Labs.  In summary, I would say a very much a focus on people in the regions, working in partnership every day with the groups.  And investment in tools and resources.  And always a shared goal of expanding how we communicate and how we help new people to come into understand how to participant.  Thank you.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Sally.  We have heard from the Panelists that diverse stakeholders that makeup the Internet Universe, the diverse context and challenge for enhanced cooperation is there and in fact, some of the challenges that some of the panelists have identified are issues of language, diversity, issues of functionality, issues of funding.  And one of the things that we have heard clearly is setting of common goals.  Particularly in terms of the context of development.  We heard from Bernadette as she poke showing the lack ofening of cooperation could skew development and in regions.  World where resources are constrained it makes complete sense for there to be effective and aggressive collaboration and it was very interesting to hear from Yurie, as she talked about some of the things that they have had to deal with over the last ten years particularly in terms of looking for opportunities for collaboration.
And one of the interesting things that Sally brought out in her discussion with us, was the issue of reforms, institutional reforms, to cater for this sort of enhanced collaboration, particularly in terms of being more accessible.
And though something Sally raised, which was very, very interesting, she mentioned that there were very keen on hiring people that were not arrogant, that were not selfish, that had a desire to collaborate.  And that brings about concepts, and attitudes and it talks about the approach that stakeholders must engage with, coming with the desire to collaborate.  Coming with a desire to step back and to say that I am willing to compromise on certain things.
And that was a very, very interesting point that Sally raised.
So with that, we would like to invite you, those of you in the workshop today, to feel free to share your thoughts or if you like to comment, feel free to do that as well.  And any of the panelists if you feel like responding to any of your fellow panelists, please do so.  The floor is open.
>> Yes, please.
Please introduce yourself for the transcript.
>> My name is  development within Arab Region League of Arab states.  Actually I totally agree with you about the importance of settings the common goal.  We have been working on a multistakeholder models for Arab Internet Governance within the region.  As Musab mentioned working on a ISP project working on Arab toplevel domains and working on initiating parallel track to the Arab IGF for enhanced cooperation.
And it's actually a new models for us for the developing states working in such a multistakeholder environment.  I totally agree upon the importance of setting the common goal.  I believe that this IGF is too much focused on the process and procedures and the products is never mentioned.  So I believe if we talk more about the product, about what we are trying to do, maybe then we would reach to a better comprehension of what's the process that we need for multistakeholder cooperation, thank you very much.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you very much, excellent point and I think Nnenna would like to respond?  Nnenna?
>> NNENNA NWAKANMA: Yeah, young on from there there's ladies seated second person on the left her name is Anna  I think she has been through the holes and the windows and the pathways, of this.  That's the lady seated there.  She is the one who invited me to the Africa Summit in Zambia and what I learned from there is the question and someone was asking today.  Should policy people go to technical meetings?
And should tech people go to policy meetings?  And the answer is a definite "yes" and that's the only way we can come out of this, because in my head I said no, I don't do names and numbers.  I won't do names and numbers.  I pictures myself and look at myself in the mirror and say Nnenna you shall not do names and numbers, but we cannot move forward if policy people like me don't so names and numbers and sit through the boring and shall most  shall endeavor meetings.  We need to go through all of that torture to come to a balance.
And the small story is while I was at the African Summit, the people of the CERT, people supposed to come in, and do a presentation on the  and they could not come.  Ratings.  Nnenna since you are there we will give you a presentation so look at me, I am standing in front of the certs guys doing a presentation of the  CERT and I was saying I don't do names or numbers.  So you cannot in this arena, say I am a policy person, I am a names person or a numbers person or this kind of person; we must be willing personally individually, to cross that bridge to cross that professional bridge, not to be afraid, going to the business meeting and see how the DNS business works.
DNS people should not be too bored to sit in the policy meeting.  And the shall and must, and the shall and must people should also sits and know how to IPv6 andIPv4work.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: We're hearing that in terms of the tendency or the temptation to work if silos, but encouraging the capacity to come out that and go into new territory, maybe territory that's foreign, because the workshops happening through the past few days have been touchingen the potential conflicts.  There's a lady  go ahead.
>> Hello?
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Introduce yourself for the transcripts, please.
>> My name is Beatrice  from the Commission of Kenya asking this question on a personal level.  Not necessarily the views of the Commission.  My question is most of these meetings, like my African Sister mentioned focuses a lot on policy and on the technical aspect.  My question is:  Would the organizations or the multistakeholders consider the involving the business end?  Because from my perception, there's a lot of the technical involvement in the multistakeholders.  You have institutions.  You have governments.  You have maybe regulators.  But in the business world, if someone is not in academics and not interested in technology it's very hard to know what these organizations do.  What this governance is and inasmuch as  is there way moving forward to incorporate other people outside of our strict organization institutions the governments and maybe a few academics institutions.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you Beatrice the issue raised whether there was private sector involvement in terms of development and synergistic initiatives?  I think the question would be best answered by somebody from the private sector.  Mr. Desitting right there.  Would you like to answer or VeriSign?  Synergistic initiatives?
>> Thank you for the opportunity and in fact, aim aim actor as a can be member.
I justwantsto acknowledge the incredible opportunities panel in terms of sharing experience collaboration between different organizations around some kind of outreach to the different communities.
In fact, I have this year have been facilitating during the event the dialogue between interregional and the global IGF and in this sense session has been planned, two of them have been completed and one will be held this afternoon at 4:30.  But I just want to make the point is that here in the panel you realize it's not only the linkage between the local and the regional needs; we have a global Oand global IGF, but as Bernadette had mentioned, is interesting to see the collaboration between these different organizations.  That have complementary agendas to solve or to support the needs of some countries of some regions, of some groups.
I have at some point in time, the opportunity to attend the first Pacific IGF with the company of Sala, works  to realize how different the needs they have, compared to other regions.  I have the opportunity to comparing the AsiaPacific IGF, and the Caribbean IGF, or the Latin America IGF.
And you realize that you have to get deep understanding of what are the  not only the local needs, but to understand also the culture, the people involved, and how to collaboratively respond to those needs.  Thank you. 
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you.  Icardo.  Bernadette, sequence.  So we will go 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.  Bernadette, please.
>> BERNADETTE LEWIS: Thank you Chair I wanted to point out the initiatives the ACU under takes on a fairly routine often.  We have awareness building activities that are designed to for different communities in language that is comprehensible to them.  And in addition, we do ministerial for where you have the business community; you have regulators; you have people from the academic fraternity and the rule is you don't use any technical jargon, but you speak in language that is comprehensible to the various stakeholders.  And this has been very, very effective in bringing diverse perspectives together and bringing diverse players together to speak on issues that are of importance to them.
You cannot do ICT policy or Internet policy without some input from the business communities and without input from policymakers or regulators, or stakeholders, really needs to be involved.  All stakeholders.  So there's arequirements of raising or reaching out and providing education and the public awareness that is necessary to enable different stakeholders to participate in the discussion on a particular topic.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Bernadette.  Go ahead Sir and you are next.
>> Thank you, my name is heSherman from Egypt  and I work for the National telecom Regulatory Authority.  I have two ideas that thought it was worth sharing with the audience.  Hearing the different initiatives and being involved some, some of these actually, as well I think the challenge is not just to make coordination happen, but to make coordination meaningful.  One has to think of an institution  analyzing the initiatives and the different efforts.
Three words comes to mind when we speak of about this.  Having thought, processes is one.
Being inclusive, especially to the IP  because being inclusive is not just keeping the door open  and, of course, building trust.  So the processes and building inclusive.
By combining these three things, I think, one could reach a meaningful coordination effort at the organizational level.  Speaking now as coming from a government active, also, all these initiatives and all these organizations working at different levels, Nnenna has mentioned a big list of entities in Africa, and other lists mentioned by my colleague in the  region there's a pressure on all our agencies and companies in terms of institutional capacities.
Not one entity can cover all aspects.
One benefit of coordination at the international level is to actually mobilize expertise from different entities in the region with similar circumstances so it's worth the effort.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you very much.
Very excellent points.
>> I am  [ Inaudible name ] from Kenya.
I am here as an Internet Society Ambassador.  My contribution is multistakeholderrism can be more enhanced through legislation.  By passing laws at the regional levels or at the local particulates.  A good example is my country Kenya has a Constitution that has multistakeholder as a models and the President himself actually he insists the all stakeholders have to be involved it if there's to be support from the top, is when this model can actually work best.
Not just as a workshop, but where there can actually be an effect on society.  Thank you.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you.  What we are hearing is political will is that what you're saying?  Highlevel political well from the topdown.  Centra?  Would you like to.
>> My name is [ Inaudible name ] from Trinidad Trinidad and Tobago Trinidad there's a wide range of countries and interests.
You have countries like Brazil, partnered with Caribbean, small Caribbean islands, like, Haiti.
I want to ask the panelists how you feel regional coordination facilities specific communities of interest, rather, than just by regional groupings but also in terms of small islands developing states' interests, for instance?
>> Sally, would you like to answer that? 
>> SALLY COSTERTON: Sorry, just the last part of the question?  Would you mind repeating it.
>> Sure.  I would like to know how you manage to coordinate both on a level that's regional, but also that enhances alignment with communities of interest?
>> SALLY COSTERTON: Thank you.  I think you make a really good point.  It's a very perceptive question.  Because when we think about what we need to  I was going to say to get out of these engagements not quite the right word but we talk about what when he put in and how we collaborate and share, but in the end communities wants specific things to help them as well.  It's a twoway process.  I think at my answer to you is I think it depends by region.  I am depending on the individuals involved.  But certainly, I would like to see and I would love ICANN to do everything it can to help this process much better sharing of what in the corporate world we call best practice.  So there are communities of interest who may be across different regions, but who really needs to connects with each other and who can help each other more quickly if we join people together and I think we need to think more creatively but how we do that.  Outside the traditional functional silos as somebody was talking earlier, policy technical community are wellestablished.  But to get people together  for example, ICANN has this today, news Flash  has put the first four new IDN global toplevel domains into the root.  This is today.  And this is an historic thing.
Now, many of  thank you  many of the IDN the International Domain Name applicants wants the domains to protect communities.
By language, or by cultural affiliation around the world.  So I don't think the answer is always build a domain toplevel but more creatively to  is something we should really listen and take that onboard.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Sally.  Nnenna and then Oscar.
>> Thanks I was thinking of your question.
>> NNENNA NWAKANMA: And I am like communities of interest.  Stakeholders today.
It's just that within the framework of WSIS there are three bodies of stakeholders, used to be three, but now we are going gently into four or five.  In island states you still a have stakeholders groups.  When we come to this IGF meetings, the main things do not happen during the panels and sessions.  They happen in between the panels and outside of the walls.
So you still need that stakeholders group to pursue your own interests.  But linking that now not question she was asking about the business group, someone was saying today and that rightly the business is wired to do 90% results, 10% process.  What is it you have to do?  That's the easiest part of business and then you  the money is how business does.  Government is not wired that way.  And Civil Society will not be wired that way.  But what we are looking at the digital economy.  In which we are not just stuck in one stakeholders group alone.  I come here as Civil Society, and many people see me as Civil Society, but I actually run a business.  And my next client for whom I am rolling out a training is Economic Commission for West African states.  Last night I was sending out my froforma pro forma  that's business for me.  What I am saying is I cannot corner myself in a business attitude.  I am going anywhere where my business interest is.  And policy people give me business.  Is the thing is we cannot make a business of the Internet.  Maybe a business with the Internet without understanding how it works.  Without understanding of how business is made out of it.  So business people cannot sit and wait to be invited.  No, you have to come and understand how this works.  And finally, I want to say there are pure Internet businesses now.  There's a gentleman who was sittinged here I don't know if he left  there's a whole DNS business boom.  So will DNS business guy sit and say, no names and numbers, our technical group are not business issues?  No.  I myself I always keep an eye on business initiatives.  I am going to buy some stuff in bulk and sell them later.  Trust me, so if I am hanging around here totaling you I am a civil service person.  Don't kid me I am with business.  When you go back to Kenya, tell the business guys we talk in IGF, but later on when we move back some checks are signed so they need to come around. 
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Wow.  Kenya has been touted to be the Silicon Valley of Africa?  Oh, it is?  Thank you.
>> Please allow me to answer that.  Thank you for your information.
>> Say your name.
>> My name is  I am from Kenya.
And I am very thankful for the information you have given.  However, there's some miscommunication in understanding the problem.
The problem is not that Kenyans don't have entrepreneurs.  We have entrepreneurs.
I was asking the question at a personal level.
I am a policy person and also a technical person so it's not an option of either  this was a very general question and the question was:  In our information how do you attract people who don't come to these meetings?  I am not talking about the  in to you're societies already here and making business aspects out of it.  I was asking the question into the entrepreneurs who were outer there and not in the mainstream and not interested in governance or Internet Governance per se.
So how do you translate our language to theirs?
Thank you. 
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you.  Beatrice and the numerous examples  you have incubators business  for now, Musab would like to.
>> Thank you very much.  I think I will touch on a couple of things to tie together a couple of points and I will start and lead up to eventually, how to answer your question how to engage them.  One the things I think is vitally important is there's clear representation of the different interests.  Because we keep talking about the stakeholders and the stakeholders.  But our  let's say we have a stakeholder from Civil Society.  Do they necessarily represent all civilizations or their Civil Society?
Likewise, government and likewise business.
So the clear representation of this is how we're going to get all viewpoints into the pot to make a decision.  Which leads mow in the term hoonsed cooperation N. as my colleague said, essentially what we are looking for is meaningful coordination here.
And meaningful coordination is effective, it's streamlined.  And in pretty much all cases, it's about reducing noise.
There's  we live in a day and age there's such a glut of information it's hard to sifts the jewels from the dross.  You get that and you get clarity and I think that's a big parts of how you engage people, because we have now heard about how technical people don't understand the policy side and vice versa.  There's notch so much for in to absorb.  Layperson who has concerns and a viewpoint to share they're not sure where to go with it.  So I think that's perhaps, reducing noise and being clear on where going might be the best way going forward.  Thank you.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Musab.  Before I summarize today's ask you guyses, Adele can you do it in two minutes?  And Oscar?  Two minutes.
>> I want to maybe stress on the involvement.  All stakeholders and, especially business it's an issue  for few reason.  We have tried look at this, the first thing is that getting interest in eggs Internet Governance mean that your business has some aspect of  most of the business involved in Internet in our region still have very local scope.  So the first thing is how do we make sure that there is a relay in each of those countries about the relevance of the Internet Governance  the global Internet Governance locally?  So by thinking global to apply global  we have few example on that on how sometimes policymakers instead of trying to  policy the relay the message to make it relevant to business.  That is one thing.
And naturally when the business, or Internet industry, in developing country will go global they will get involved in the global Internet Governance issue, because they will see the impact directly on them.  I will give a very simple example.  Few years ago, we had been approached by policymaker from Nigeria about IP addresses.
Where local businesses were giving different message about IP address we took time to explain to the policiesmaker  they didn't get that message not policymaker  the policymaker able to send the message to elaborate the message to their business and got involved in the process  how to register the number how to make the job more easy for the policymaker.  There's been no change in the multistakeholder process, but this has been about information so how do we relate the global issue about Internet Governance locally?  That's the issue and everybody has a responsibility on that.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you.  Asell.  I have been told that we have 13 minutes.  So there's time for people to make comments.  But to allow for people make comments we ask you to limits to two minutes.  Oscar, please.
>> OSCAR ROBLES: Thank you, let me briefly react to the discussion that legislation is needed in order to improve the multistakeholder reason in the countries.  I understand that there's no needforlegislation, but we just need willingness from the government and we have to be very carefully, because multistakeholder is a very complex issue for governments.  They are not used to consult other areas or everybody in order to execute or to do some action.
The what's  teach they will not teach to  to make this consultations broadly.
I mean most of the decisions that the governments have to make are done within the government.  So this is a very complex process and rather than awareness process, rather than a single acts, like the legislation.
And that's only one part of the equation.  The other part of the equation is that the rest of the community, the business, the Civil Society, academy and all these organizations we need to understand the challenges of every discussion that we are holding.
It is not only about technical parameters or names or just numbers.
It is many issues that we have to consider.  And we have to be taught on these issues as well.  It's not only the government to understand the multistakeholder is; it is on also about us to understand that it is not only the technical discussions  it is not anymore technical discussions.  That's where, I think, that contribution like LAC NIC has helped to improve the level of discussions, putting together in a single space in this meetings people from governments and people from candiesia and the technical side academia to share the experiences.  Of course, it has to be brought to the local level to actually do actions and execute local strategies.  Not staying at the dialogue level only.  But that's something that has to do and has to happen at the local level.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you, Oscar.
I would also like to add that clearly what's been coming out of apart from having the need for common goals, the need for common language, but something that has to take place well before that is the need to have clear vision and clearly, for there to be a clear vision there has to be a shared vision of what it is that you want to build.
Particularly in terms of identifying goals and laying objectives.  So despite the different interests, despite the different stakeholders groupersand diversity of expression and despite of different challenges whether it's languages, geographically distributions nationalities or scope, but having a clear vision makes people  allows for a keyworded approach how people will engage and that came across clearly were the panelists discussions and also from interactions from the floor.
And in the context where we are at a juncture where people are questioning is there enhanced cooperation?  Can it be done?  Here we have panelists saying that it is being done and it has been done and it's been in the process of everything the Internet community has been in existence, there's been enhance the cooperation across the regions all over the world.  You have Internet Exchange scattered across the world.  You have policy collaboration taking place at multiple levels.  Diverse forums and whatnot.  The challenge for our community is how do we share the lessons and experiences?  So I am happy to advise that we will be putting together a report, Mr. Yemen Valdez of NRO will be consolidating a report of today's discussions.  Now if you feel that there are things you would like to add to the dialogue, even though we have limited time here, please feel free to email him your comments, your contributions.  And share your experiences from your countries, from your communities, from your organizations.  So we can celebrate these experiences.  Does anyone wants to have any last word before we wrap up today's discussion?
Any other panelists?  Sally?
>> SALLY COSTERTON: Thank you.
I just wanted to say one last words.  I think on the question of how do we widen business engagements?
And I don't think it's just business, by the way.  I think it's users.  I think it's  what sometimes you hear people refer to as "normal" people.  And I think the idea that this is the biggest challenge I face in my day job.  Honestly, how do we go and find the people that we need who do need us, they just don't know they do yet?  And one of the biggest challenges is, is that how do we make it compelling and relevant so they come to the table, because the government the multistakeholder model relies on more voices, more people insisting they have their seat in order to be truly successful it's not a nice to have in my view.  But a musthave.  ICANN model.  I feel positive this probably shares that sense.  Thank you.
>> SALA TAMAKIKAIWAIMARO: Thank you Sally and the point that Adele made neatly wraps up our discussions for today when he said it's important to communicate the power of information and coordination and all the things that were shared today.  And this words per minute would not have been possible without the excellent assistance of the NRO staff and we thank Yemen and the team those who facilitating the remote moderation and the assistive staff for facilitating the moderation.  And we also thank those who are translating the discussions and don't forget our panelists who is remoting streaming in sacrificing sleep time.  Give her a hand.  Thank you Yurie and also thank you panelists for a wonderful time and with that our workshop is now concluded.  Thank you.
[ Applause ]
[ End of File ]
 11:25 PM CT.
 

