WS32-230 NEXT IN IDNS: LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY IN THE INTERNET ROOT 




EIGHTH INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM
BALI
NEXT IN IDNS: LINGUISTIC DIVERSITY IN THE INTERNET ROOT
OCTOBER 23, 2013
WS32-230
14:30-16:00
   
    >> Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  Welcome to workshop 32.
  Next in eye DNS, Linguistic Diversity in the Internet Root.
    This workshop is organised by ICANN in collaboration with AP ral lo,
  with an a community of Internet users from the Australia region.  My
  name is -- I'm raim raip raim.  We're going to discuss a project that
  is being implemented by ICANN.  This enables the introduction of IDN
  into the root zone which allows access to IDN top level domains.  What
  we will do is share some information about the project, tell you why
  ICANN has this project.
    What the procedure is for enabling the introduction of IDN variance
  into the root zone.  What is the status of the project.  And then we
  will invite comments from community representatives on what they think
  about this project and how it will affect the language communities
  around the world.
    And we will also get an idea what the var vants are for Arabic, the
  Han script, the Chinese language and Japanese as well as indic.  We
  will start with executive vice president and chief technology user
  of -- participating remotely.
    RAM, if you are on line, #34r50es go ahoed.
    >> RAM MOHAN:  Thank you very much.  I hope you can hear.  So
  Rinalia, thank you very much for inviting me to this session.  It's --
  both this session has important importance in terms of what the sense
  of what we're trying to do but also the -- of what we're trying to do.
  When only 27 of the world speaks English, which uses ASCII as its
  underlying script, it seems obvious that the DNS needed to move to
  support local languages and scripts.
    Certainly through ICANN and the ICANN community the need to add
  linguistic diversity to the Internet was established quite clearly.
  But as with all things technical, it has taken us just over a decade in
  order to achieve an overnight success.
    In having IDNs, international domain names at the -- delegated at the
  top level of the root system.
    Let's speak for a minute about the strategic intent of the root zone
  label generation root project.  Before we get into speaking about label
  generation, just a quick idea of what -- why they're really trying to
  do label generations at the root.
    The fact is that for each language it is represented underneath it by
  a script, by a written form that is then converted into a digital wave
  that is adapted DNS and resolvers can understand and interput.  What
  was clear was that at the root zone, swi a very unique resource, we
  didn't have a list that clearly represented for each of the languages
  that we wanted to have on the root to have what were the rules and what
  were the representations in the digital format of these characters that
  form the language.
    The IDN variant TOD project was established by the ICANN board in
  2010.  And what this project allowed was the creation of a
  multistakeholder project that was tasked to develop solutions and to
  implement -- fine the implement rules of processing.  So that we could
  have the delegation of IDN variant top loader names in the root zone.
    Now, the mult stakeholder model has been a key part of the creation
  and the development and the deployment of the root zone label
  generation rules procedure.
    Now, as you know, ICANN in general works pretty hard on deploying
  solutions, identifying solutions as well as deploying them by using a
  community oriented multistake hold r model.  The IDN TOD programme and
  the variant part, IDN variant TOD programme is quite a good case study
  in the development and deployment of the multistakeholder model and
  multistakeholder system.  To start with, various languages and
  scripts -- script systems that were selected for study, analysis and
  creation of the table, language tables and language rules, this pulled
  in 66 experts from 29 countries and territories around the world.  But
  expertise in the area of DNS, IDNA, linguistic, security and stability
  as well as policy, operations and registry and registrar perspective,
  and to some extent, perspective from the end user and the Internet
  users' point of view.
    ICANN also created an issues report that looked at the risks and
  looked at the methodologies for ruling out top level domains using IDNs
  that had variants associated with them.  And that too brought together
  representatives from the various case study teams who were volunteers
  and who were members from all around the world, from various
  communities.
    In addition to the participation that was -- that came together by
  technical and linguistic experts and security experts from around the
  world, the community at large has also been directly engaged.  The at
  large advisory committee has organised several extremely useful and
  well attended workshops on the topic of IDN topical domains, usage of
  top kag domains using wide bands, the deployment of variants using at
  the IDN top level.  And in addition to that there have been public
  comment periods, conference presentations and discussions.
    And all of this has happened not only inside of the ICANN context,
  but also in other multistakeholder Flora such as the IPF.
    So in conclusion, the -- this entire project is a strategic intent
  for ICANN and the ICANN community, but most importantly ( it's of
  urgent need for the world's multilingual community.  Not deploying IDNs
  at the top level has for years been a key criticism of the mono oral or
  mono -- model of the DNS and for the first time in a long time we're
  moving in a historic way from having only ASCII and only English or the
  romance language that was entered at the top level, we're moving to
  have local languages also available at the top level.
    Now, technically keep in mind that DNS only knows ASCII, so even the
  local languages eventually for computers, they get translated into an
  ASCII equivalent, into a special code called quni code.  That's a
  technical detail.  When it comes to the end user, with for the first
  time we're looking at the ability to type in an entire website address
  in local language, to send an email that is written completely in your
  own local language, whether it is a left to right language or a right
  to left language.  That is historic, and that is also something that
  has been built with the multistakeholder model at the core of it.
    Back to you, Rinalia.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, RAM.  I think that was very
  valuable.  I think -- she could type a domain name all the way in
  Arabic and be able to use variants if this project is successful.  To
  understand what the procedure is, this famous procedure, I invite
  Andrew Sullivan, principal art tekt of Dyn to share the procedure with
  us.  And he's here not because he's with Dyn, but because he's one of
  the lead consultants that helped develop this procedure itself.  So if
  you do not like it, you can tell him so.
    Go ahead.
    >> ANDREW SULLIVAN:  That's right, it's all my fault.  Thank you very
  much.
    That's fun -- so I'm going to go very quickly here at the beginning
  to give some reminder of the context of this before we go on.
    So to begin with, the DNS is a tree structure and it's got all these
  different levels and it was developed a number of years ago, in fact in
  1980s, it's fundamental to the way everything works on the Internet.
  U-can't do stuff without it.  If you don't have the DNS, you're out of
  luck and this is why people wanted labels other than simply ss ki in
  there.  Next, please.
    Remember in the DNS they're made up of these little segments, called
  labels.  And these labels, whether it's way to the left or -- next --
  even the right most one, they're just labels.  All the same kind of
  thing.  So there's nothing special about any particular label.  And
  this is important to understand.  The piece of the domain name is not
  particularly important.  It turns out of course there is a practical
  consequence, technical consequences at the top level because of the way
  the top level is used.  The reason for that is that it's got this
  common root.
    So in the DNS we have these things delegations, and delegation can
  happen anywhere.  What happens is you take part of the name space and
  give it to someone else.
    This can happen, you know, anywhere in the tree, including even far
  down in the tree.  So this is an important other thing that is you give
  away chunks of the name space and you don't have any control inside the
  space that you've just given away.  Another fundamental point.
    Finally, we've got this one root, and this is one root by definition
  when people talk about alternate roots they are amaking a complaint
  about math.  This is just a fact of directed graphs.  And so there's
  this one root.  And that means this is a completely unique zone on the
  Internet.  And that's the key thing here that we have to have one
  common set of rules for this zone because everybody in the world has to
  share it whether they like it or not.
    That's the reason that we need this.
    All right.  So we came up with this idea about the label generation
  rules.
    And what this is, we start with some fundamental things.
    Yes?  You want me slower.  All right.
    So we've come up with the label generation rules, and we're starting
  with the basic facts of the DNS.  The first thing is DNS names are not
  words, they're mnemonics.  They're useful things.  But of course
  mnemonics have to be useful to someone, which means that for you to be
  able to use them, you need to be familiar, it needs to be a familiar
  and recognized writing system and naturally if you don't use ASCII in
  your everyday life, of course those letters are not very useful for you
  and that's the reason why we need today do this.
    We have to remember that the existing rules for the DNS already
  restrict some labels.  So in the DNS historically you weren't allowed
  to use the word "can't with an apostrophe, you can't put the word argh
  in there with an ex complamgs point because they are's not words.
  There's just a bunch of mnemonics there.
    We have new label, the IDNA labels, it's new, that means you need
  more rules.  That's the reason we need these rules.
    Now, another important thing to understand is that these label
  generation rules work on code points.  So there's more than one thing
  you could have done here.  But the way that this actually works just
  technically is it works on code points.  Code points are a little bit
  of of technology.  Normally you think you're writing in characters or
  in words, but when you encode this in a machine, you've got to encode
  it in a character set.  This character set that we're using is called
  uni code and uni code is made up of code points and these code points
  have funny names like this.  U plus 0065, that's a code point.  That
  corresponds to an E.  And Uplus 0638 is the Greek small letter Sy.  So
  these are just code points in every code, every letter that you can
  write has one or more code points.
    There can be multiples.
    I said there can be multiples.  Isn't this fun?
    There is this problem when you have more than one code point and it
  can be more than one code point as a reader, a competent reader cannot
  tell the difference between one and the other, or it can be more than
  one code point whereas a competent reader you can see the difference,
  but you think they're the same thing.
    One way or the other, you've got in some writing systems a case where
  different code points can sometimes be interchanged one for the other.
  They can be exchanged.
    So one example is simplified in traditional try knee but there's
  other examples, lots of other examples.
    What we want to do in this procedure is present allocation of any
  label to competing applicants.  ( This is any label in the root zone,
  only for the root zone, not making rules about further down the tree.
  That stuff has been delegated away.  And we also want to allow the
  possibility of some variants, IDN variants that match each other and
  going to be used by people always to go to the ofrj applicant.  Both of
  these features.  That's what the label generation rules are about.
  They define these variants and their possible disposition, in order to
  do that you've got to have the list of all the code points.
    So we developed a list of the allowable code points.  Had is the
  squalled repertoire.  We developed rules for using this repertoire.
  And the point of this is not to have a bunch of rules for whatever
  people want right now.  ( You don't want ad hoc rules that are subject
  to political discussion every time.  You want a rule set that allows
  you to accommodate the pew it your developments, minimize the risk to
  the root zone and make sure these rules are automatic.  When something
  new comes along, because new characters ged added to uni code from time
  to time, you want to make sure they can be accommodated in the system
  too.
    Now, it turns out that the Internet architecture board had a view
  about what you should do in this case.  And the reason for this is that
  the Internet architecture board previously had something to say about
  how the top level ought to be managed and prior to that there were very
  old documents that said something about what should be in the root
  zone.  If we were going to expand, since this is something everybody on
  the Internet needs to use all the time.
    Came up with the principals on the side.  The key one, the one that
  is most important to take away, conservatism was the number one lelgd
  pel to stick too here.  When you Rand into any case where you weren't
  shoe how it was going to work or whether it was going to work all the
  time or useful all the time, the best thing to do was not to do that.
  Not to use that code point.  Not to use that label because everybody in
  the world has to share this -- this resource.
    So it's one thing to say way down in your local zone, you know, have
  all kinds of crazy labels you want.  But if you're going to have
  something that everybody in the world has to share, what you have to do
  is use the minimum thing that you can put in there while nevertheless
  accommodating people so they can use labels according to familiar
  writing systems, they can actually use them.
    Next, please.
    There's a flow chart here that gives you a picture of what the IDN
  root zone works, this label generation rules procedure.  The basic
  thing is you have generation panels and they come up with proposals
  much then you've got this integration panel.  And the integration panel
  is supposed to be universal world experts who are suppose today achieve
  agreement among these competing proposals.  The proposals are not
  supposed to compete with one another, from time to time you're going to
  get cases where different language communities either use the same
  letters or use letters that sort of bump up against one another, and in
  that case you need to make sure -- you don't need to decide one in
  favor of the other, what you need to do instead is coordinate to make
  sure that nobody's ox is getting gored to much.  We want to make sure
  that all the oxes wonder around happily.  That sometimes mean you say
  no to people, but the reason you have to do that is because you know,
  this is a common resource and we've got to share it.  And at the end of
  this you spit out this label generation rules and it defines these
  things there on the slide.
    Okay.  Why do we have only one set of rules?  Is.
    As I have said repeatedly but I'm going to hammer you with all of
  this because it's been one of the things people keep complaining about,
  it's only one zone and it's a common zone.  We can't get away from it.
  Everybody has to have it.  And therefore we need one set of rules and
  we need only one set of rules for the entire zone in case there are
  collisions in the different rules.
    The generation panels are volunteers and they're supposed to get
  together.  This is supposed o to be very much a bottom up process.  The
  goal of this is to represent community interests and also to make sure
  that he have woo he particular writing expertise.  Invite these outside
  experts and so on, and that will work.
    The integration panel is supposed to be really serious experts in the
  various technologies that are being used here.  So DNS, IDNA, uni code,
  linguistics.  They're supposed to accept these generation panel
  proposals and supposed to put them together and finally come up with a
  common set of rules.  And importantly, they're supposed to make
  decisions unanimously.  So they're not allowed to make decisions -- I
  know, I'm running out of time --
                (Chuckling) 
       but I'm not going too fast, exactly.
    Finally, you've got this output -- and this is the overall repertoire
    for the roolt, divided into subrepertoires by script and
    these labels are constrained to be wholly within a
    subtagged repertoire.  You've got these things that
    somehow get a linguistic piece with it.  I didn't write
    these slides, so -- I would have been shorter.
    Finally, and this really is the last thing I have to say, only some
    labels, some writing systems have variants.  And variants
    are defined globally not by subrepertoire.  Despite the
    repertoire you says everything in this label has to be in
    the same writing system, variants actually cut across the
    entire set.  And this is all in a machine readable format.
    It can be processed automatically.  I'm sorry I went over.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, Andrew.  And ICANN has actually
  started the implementation of this project.  And acram ala is here to
  tell us what the status is.  And he is the president of the ICANN's
  domain division, which coordinates the coordination of this project.
  Go ahead, ak RAM.
    >> Thank you for coming here and listening to this important topic.
  I'll leave them to the end.  The integration -- the implementation of
  this procedure is actually well underway.  We have actually started
  with the integration panel, which has been launched.  And melt already
  earlier in October.
    They are working on setting up the repertoire or the bigger set of
  what the LGR set could be.  They are also putting their -- you know,
  putting their arms around the maximum set.  They are looking at the
  label evaluation rules so that everybody can do the same, follow the
  same procedures.  They are also looking at the format for submitting
  LGRs to the integration panel.  So that doing the guidelines for how
  the generation panels will interact with the integration panel.  On the
  generation panels there was a call for generation panels to be formed.
  We've received statements of interest already from different stricts.
    Once these -- once a script or a group of people get around the
  script and decide to form a panel, that panel will be seated and
  immediately after that they can start their work.
    So we're expecting the first panel to be launched before the end of
  the year.
    Now, that depends on the, you know, how quickly the committee can
  organise itself around the scripts if it wants, and that if want toss
  develop.
    Today we have a lot of scripts inmremented in the DNS.  We have nine
  scripts that are included in the new GTLD applications and there are
  already another eight that are included in the CCTLD eye DNS.  We
  expect the generation panel will be formed to make all of these and
  there is no reason why we can't implement additional generation panels
  if other scripts would like to start their work earlier.
    I want to say that we're behind.  There's no question about that.
  Ideally all of this work should have happened before the DNS was
  started.  So that it would have been designed with all of the scripts
  in mind.
    So that the rules that are set took into account all of the different
  scripts.  But we are where we are.  And I think this is very important
  work and we're just scratching the surface.
    We talk about doing this work for only the root, but I think once
  this work is done, then there will be a large implementation for this
  work.  I think a lot of the TLDs will take that aadopt these LGRs for
  their second level and third level.
    I think there is a lot of implementations where once we set the rules
  for variants, these variants rules will also apply downstream.  So
  there is -- this work is just the beginning of a lot of advantages for
  other scripts and the Latin script.  And I'm looking forward to
  actually seeing more progress on this.  And hopefully we can take
  advantage of these rules to start thinking in a lot of different areas
  with multiple script mentality.  I give an example.  There is a lot of
  rpns in the TMCH.  These rpms are thought of in just ASCII.  Rpms
  stands for rights protection mechanisms for trademark holders.
    So when you think about these mechanisms and they -- the way they're
  developed, they're developed by a mentality and a thought of English or
  Latin script.  Once we get the same applications or -- of TLDs and IDNs
  that go into TMCH, there will be an advantage because nobody's thinking
  in those different scripts what are the variations that should be
  protected.  For example for a trademark.
    So just start from there, you can see how we're so far behind.  We
  need to catch up.
    So -- thank you very much.  I will be happy to take questions later.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, ak RAM.  Would I would like to do
  now is invite comments from three representatives from end user
  communities.  They represent the language communities of Arabic,
  Chinese and Indic script.  That's you.
    And we have Mohammed El about a shir, bMohamed El Bashir, he has some
  slides.  He waes supposed to be here.  Unfortunately there was a dns
  attack on his registry and he had to be in Qatar to take care of it.
  Therefore he's participating with us remotely today.
    Maureen, do you have his slides here?
    Yes.  Is he online he's not online.  Okay.  So he's not online right
  now.
    Okay.  The dns atacted and intervened and took him away.  We'll go to
  the next person, then.  Hong Xue.
    >> HONG XUE:  Thank you, good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  My
  name is.
    >> HONG XUE:  A law professor from Beijing normal University.  Where
  time goes fast.  I remember 13 years ago in 2000 when the word number
  one, word first, language-based IDN consultant, consortium was
  established in Beijing.  I was one of the drafters of the charter along
  with professor Wu, sitting over there across the table.  But CDNC is a
  first community based -- language community based IDN process to deal
  with the variants and the other IDN variant technical issues.  I guess
  that's very good community based initiatives.  And in 2000, ICANN stab
  established a first working bored chaired by Mr. Katu osinabu.  Made a
  first submission to this working group and made the first policy
  proposal on IDN TLD management.  I was the pen holder of this first
  mission but idea primarily came from madam hu, ching hunk who is
  president of -- China and has been accredited to the hall of fame by
  athought this year.  We propose that for IDN variants management it
  should being absolutely based on language communities proposals and
  issues.  And we propose rough policy issues such as for IDN TLDs, ICANN
  which go to the easier part first, think about IDN cyst TLD first
  before identifying -- after 30 years our proposal has become a reality.
  We're so happy yesterday, the first group of Chinese ID N TLD has gone
  alive.
    So this is very much positive achievement.
    I'd like to go to a few principles that's been experienced by Chinese
  community, even though we're not very good at summarizing these
  principles but it has been enshrined in practicing.  One is
  community-based.  It must be based on the language community.  Language
  community is a concept first raised by Chinese language community.  In
  that first submission to ICANN.  And I hope I can do -- ICANN retains
  these historical documents.  And we could refresh our institutional
  memory.  It seems it can be fun anywhere in ICANN that size.
    Language community is open concept much it is not defined by language
  sofrnt.  That's ridiculous.  If you speak that language, you are in
  that community.  So we are often joking that there is a bigger
  English-xeeking community in China than United States.  So as far as
  you speak that language, you, that language community, and certainly it
  should be a bottom up process.  Think about the CDNC Chinese domain
  name consortium.  A he can it kal community.  It's thot by government.
    And thirdly it should be multistakeholder.  CDNC is a very
  interesting organisation.  Professor Wu and I were the founders, among
  the founders.  We're now only observers.  It is multistakeholder was
  due there but we are now observers, in civil society it is now only
  open for the full membership for registries.  Primarily CCTLE -- but we
  can call it a multistakeholder organisation.  And also last but not
  least it should be consensus based.  I know from the readers how to
  deal with disputes.  I strongly dislike disparity resolution.  Even
  though I'm a lawyer.  It is consensus based, it should find common
  dominator accepted most widely in the community.
    Even the code point permissible in this DNS system, especially root
  level, it should be really acceptable to that community because it's
  user in that community is really going to use those codes.  Thanks.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, Hong.  I think later in Edmon's
  presentation he will give the example or case study how the Chinese
  language in the Han script language came together to resolve their
  differences.  Next I would like to invite Satish Babu.
    >> SATISH BABU:  Thank you, I am from the international -- software
  in India.  I will be speaking from the perspective of a user, as --
  especially from south Asia for the technology aspects we have senior
  people from both the government and technology side of things from
  India.
    So I'll steer clear of the technology aspect.
    First of all I'd like to say that IDNs actually is a very important
  compliment of multilingualism which reaffirms the universal access that
  we have been talking about since yesterday.
    As far as India is concerned, we have a lot of complexity with about
  22 languages, with about 19 of them using 11 scripts.  So again imagine
  the whole idea of -- 11 ought mattic scripts and three Arabic scripts
  much we have problems of one to many and many to one.  Some languages
  using multiple script, some scripts being used by several languages.
  One for example is used by nine different languages.
    Now, these actually kind of pose several complexities.  In addition,
  we also have issues with things like rendering with multi tear lifts,
  baseline shifting, homo graphs and homo phones.  We don't have the
  issue of low word upper case.  But we also have issues like with pretty
  kind of unique to Indic languages, with 0s and so on.  Some languages
  do not have all the letters.  Translation is sometimes difficult.  One
  language not from India but the Urdu language uses the same script, the
  naslik script which is vertical, it goes up as you write.  It's a very
  beautiful kind of representation.  And this last week we were reading
  that that script is dying out because computers are not able to support
  that particular script.  And the community is actually really concerned
  about the loss of the diversity.
    So we have, you know, several issues of both encoding and rernding
  which are -- because of the fact that we have these many languages.
    Now, as far as the procedure is concerned, we have some general
  recommendations.  The first recommendation is the mechanism specified
  by the procedure for the oversight of this whole process is the public
  comments.  We are aware that public comments causes a kind of
  multistakeholder organisation, that is the only way we can go.
  However, we would like to highlight the fact that there are some
  weaknesses of this model as well.  For example can be ensured that the
  participation of all 11 stakeholders is effected.  You know, all the
  logistics and mechanics of this procedure.  I would like to flag the
  issue as one that requires perhaps a little more work to ensure that
  there is transparent representative activity or action that goes on in
  this public comment process.
    The other issues that there is a lot of interest in India from -- on
  this issue of the IDNs, international domain names, there is, as you
  can see, has been mentioned already, we are quite active in terms of
  the already GTLD representative right now and also delegated, they
  have -- have already been delegated.
    Now, in the issue of the panels, the problem is that the fragmented
  kind of language communities in India, as very different from what Han
  mentioned in terms of Chinese, for example, a fairly homogenous kind of
  community, how are we going to ensure that the communities are aware of
  these processes and how do we -- what are the facilities that we have
  at hand to ensure that the participation of all these communities is
  ensured? ?
    That I think is something that we have to -- we're not clear, but
  sitting in India, in fact the corner of the country, we do not see a
  process of facilitation that exists for the smaller language
  communities.  In the -- like in Hindi and all, are not very sure, but
  smaller communities there is this issue that the process is not
  transparent and participants as of now.  I would like to flag that as
  also an issue of concern.  That in a very, very diverse country like
  India, one has to take care of.
    Thanks very much.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, Satish.  After this we would like
  to get the presentations from the expert panel and I would like you to
  get ready.  You're starting first.  You want to come here and present.
  And while he's setting up, do you have a response, ak RAM, in terms of
  what is ICANN doing to facilitate, the smaller ones, how are they
  getting to know about the project, and are we doing anything about the
  weakness of the public comments?
    >> Ak RAM:  Weaknesses of the public comments.  Yes, I can as looking
  into the public comment process, ICANN in the community, we've done
  multiple reviews on that and continue to improve the process.  (.
    We would like to see the public comment in multiple languages, but
  right now the majority of the public comments that we get are actually
  in -- in English and we haven't seen a lot of demand for other scripts
  into -- in the public comment.
    Nonetheless, an area that we're more than willing to investigate and
  look into.  Today as I mentioned on the -- on the LGR, there are about
  17 panels that we're expecting to be working on different scripts.  We
  don't have any outreach programmes right now other than the grassroot
  outreach programmes that you guys are doing to reach out to other
  communities and see if there's anything interested.  But we are more
  than willing to participate and help if there are any communities that
  want to do a -- form a panel on a script that's not -- that hasn't been
  mentioned at this time.
    So please let us know.  And if you need any help, we'll figure out a
  way to help you in it.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Yes, thank you, akRAM.
    ROM would like to make a comment.  Go ahead.
    >> RAM MOHAN:  For the previous comment for more communities and
  languages, I guess my perspective is that the need and the interest has
  to be reflected from the community into the process.  As akRAM said,
  the process is quite open for fulfilling these needs.  When we -- what
  I think a quite a bit of the initial start-up -- righting wrongs, even
  in the local language community.  If you look for example at the one
  script, I think it would be important to get together and define what
  needs to be done to represent it in the DNS.  And then come into the
  process.  Because the process is welcoming and embracing of all the
  various languages on the representations.  You know, on the DNS, so
  long as you can get to unique representations.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, RAM.
    Are you ready now, Sarmad?
    Sarmad Hussain is going to make a presentation about the Arabic
  community and the work that they're doing and to give you some idea of
  the variants in Arabic.  He is professor of computer science and head
  of the language of engineering, University of engineering, Pakistan.
    >> SARMAD HUSSAIN:  Thank you, Rinalia.  I will give an overview of
  what is the latest progress as far as IDNs and variants are concerned
  for Arabic script.  Just to start with a little bit of history, the
  community work for Arabic script actually started long time ago, back
  in 2002.
    But the more recent work started again when the IDN RFCs were revised
  in 2008 the Arabic script community came together again and formulated
  a group to look at the relevant issues related to international -- it
  was a develop phone group by the name of -- Arabic script idea group.
  The group worked for a couple years.  It had participation from
  multiple countries, pull pel languages.  And were able to come together
  and do the relevant homework.  Which as I will share later was then
  taken up by other initiatives later in the stream.  (.
    In around 2009 the first track process was started, and many of the
  communities, countries which were using -- which are using Arabic
  script actually used the fast track process to apply for the local
  strippings, strings in Arabic script.
    The initial homework which was done by Asfik was eventually used by
  these communities to develop language tables.  They weren't called
  language tables at that time.  They're now called language generation
  rules.  And they were submitted to ICANN along with the applications.
  And many of those obviously ccTLDs, have been approved and many of them
  are now delegated and working.
    So later on there was a start of Arabic variant issues project.
  Arabic -- sorry, generally variant issues project and Arabic was one of
  the languages selected as a case study.  There was a team formulated in
  2011 which worked in -- in 2010 and delivered a report on Arabic issues
  with Arabic script as far as variants were concerned.
    This work was actually in continuation with what the initial work,
  which was started by aswig.
    Further down once the issues were identified, they were -- the
  community also contributed to the user experience study done by the
  variant issues project.  And currently it has now coming together.  It
  has actually come together again as a task force on Arabic script IDNs.
  I will talk a little more about it towards the end of this
  presentation.
    I think one of the things which I'm trying to present here is that
  the Arabic script community actually has been very active for many,
  many years now.  It has done a lot of homework.  And it's actually now
  very ready to actually go and do the next step and develop the LGR and
  start getting the variants.
    Okay.  Just to give an overview -- I'm not going to get into details
  of this, this is all documented in reports.  Elsewhere.
    But there are lot of -- the idea of variants, which Arabic script
  has.  There's three large high level categories.  You can have
  characters which are duplicately encoded but have exactly the same
  shape.  They have some characters have shape in all context, same shape
  in all contexts, some have same shape in certain contexts.  And there
  are also characters which have similar shapes, not same shapes but
  they're still confusing for user communities.  And then there are these
  third kind of characters which are totally different in shape, but the
  user communities consider them as the same.
    So there are all these different kind of variants which exist and it
  needs to be tackled with as far as generational label, generation rules
  as concerned for Arabic.
    So there is obviously a need for this.  Soez you see Pakistan written
  there.  Even though it looks exactly the same way, it has internally a
  different set of code points.  So these two things will look the same
  to the user, but will need to be -- the current system would consider
  them as different strings.  It should not be considered.  They should
  not be considered as different strings.  So some mechanism through
  variants should obviously need to be introduced to map these onto each
  other.
    There are about 120 such cases in Arabic script so far which have
  been identified for further discussion.  And they need to be eventually
  worked out for -- by the community.  And then all the variants which
  are generated, they need to be eventually -- some of them at least need
  to be located because different user communities use different
  keyboards.  And so some people will be, for example, typing 0643 and
  some peep will be typing 0689.  So you cannot allocate one and block
  the other and so on.
    And then there is real need so out of the 16 CCID applications, with
  ICANN right now, four have applicant -- four have requested for
  variants.  So that's like 25 percent.  So variants are needed.  Though
  they are need, they also pose some challenges which need to be
  obviously addressed.  Again there are multiple layers of these
  challenges within the processes, within the tools, within the user
  applications.  Obviously for example one of the key things is a string
  may have more than 500, 600 variants.  So how do you decide which
  variants to activate and which variants not to activate?
    Some of those challenges obviously need to be met eventually.
    So let me now come to the last part of my presentation.  Which is
  focussed on what -- what are we doing now.
    So as I said, based on the history, there has been homework done but
  that work now needs to conclude into what is labeled generation rules
  set for rule zone.  But -- root zone.  Generation are not only needed
  for root zones, also for other notes down the tree.
    So the community's actually come together through middle -- actually
  a strategy group formed by ICANN.  It's called middle strategy working
  group.  And it's actually formulated, dedicated task force to not only
  look at LGR, but actually look at Arabic script ideas holistically in
  larger context.  LGRs is root zone LGR is obviously the first thing
  which this task force is going to take up.  But it is not going to take
  this up in isolation.  It's going to look at Arabic domain labels
  for -- in other contexts as well.  For example second level LGRs,
  universal stablt of Arabic IDNs and so on.  It's going to take up many
  more things.
    Just to give you a little more introduction of this task force,
  it's -- its membership is open shall it's community based.  There was
  actually a public call done for it.  ( In August and September time.
  Applications were received.  Everybody who had applied was incorporated
  in the task force.  It's a rolling process.  Is' not something which
  was closed in September.
    To ensure -- so the task force was formally announced at Arabic IGF,
  two in Algeria recently.  We've actually been making sure that there is
  diversity in this task force.  So currently we have 20 members and 15
  from 15 different countries.  We started at about 15 members from about
  12 countries.  But we were missing some significant representation from
  languages which are not covered.  So we have been able to go out, we
  reached out to people who worked with those languages, invited them to
  join the task force and brought them on board.  Now actually the task
  force covers a reasonable variety of languages which include languages
  across southeast Asia, south Asia, Middle East, north Africa and sub
  Saharan Africa.  And I will conclude here.  Thank you very much.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you.  Akshat Joshi Joshi will present
  on Devanagari.
    >> AKSHAT JOSHI JOSHI:  I will be giving you an overview of various
  cases through the Devanagari study went.  Before I get started I would
  like to give you an overview of Miss Organisation that is Cdek.  We are
  based in India and we are working on multiple level computing.  Most of
  the operations are based on language processing.  And why we are
  working on IDNs is we had initially been working on the Indian IDNs and
  IDN, CCTLD.  And we have been working with the parent organisation with
  the dot IDNcctld.
    We have mrn planning on working on -- and we have done fairly good
  amount of ground work for that.  There were some issues that came up
  when we talk about launching IDNs in Indian languages and subsequently
  even when as the new programme launched, the need for identification of
  issues for Indian languages was filled by ICANN as well and then this
  project started.
    So there's a bit of background.  I have just roughly divided this
  presentation into four parts.  Initially overview, then we go into the
  issues, solutions and some of the probable resolutions which will take
  to the final groups on NGR for the Devanagari.  Devanagari script is
  basically a -- it has alphabets and syllables.  The main components of
  the writing system are consonants, which are standard -- stand alone
  consonants.  There are vowels, which are accompanied by associated die
  creddic marks.  I will just view -- this image over here, just using
  glimpse of what -- where it is possible combinations that can be done
  with a root character.  I will just try to elaborate a bit on this.
    This is the highlighted part, the base character.  And what is
  surrounding that, these are the various characters which can be
  associated with this base character to form multiple shapes.  This is
  the Devanagari script as representative.  And here are other scripts
  like this is Bangla, and most of the other scripts.  These all are
  scripts basically having the same parent script that is Brami, the
  founding principles of these scripts are almost similar, even though
  individually they are a bit different.
    So when the project started, there was discussion regarding whether
  we should only go for the Devanagari or some associated scripts.  But
  then it was thought of that we'll start with the Devanagari and since
  the Devanagari has the same structure and similarities as other family
  based scripts, most of the issues will be applicable equally to the
  other scripts as well.
    Entering into the issues part, I will just try to stress upon the
  point about why visual similarities are concerned for the Devanagari
  script.  When by the numbers, the Devanagari typically has 37
  consonants which are general use.  15 vowels which combine with the
  consonants.  And 14 vowel signs.  There is just a bit of math over
  there.  Let's say that with these many characters we have 6951 basic
  shapes.  Which a normal user can understand.
    And then there is another concept of concern too.  Base consonants
  join with each other to form a different combination, visual
  combination.  If we add up that thing here, what we end up actually is
  in 57,000 different shapes.  Which a user can understand.  Not all
  57,000 are in use, but if you go by the -- whatever is the general
  usage, it still stands at 25,000 unique shapes.  A regular font has 500
  basic glyphs, out of which the characters are composed.
    And then there are even more complex levels that are not even going
  into that level.  But these are the number of shapes that are possible
  in the Devanagari languages.  And with these many shapes, the visual
  similarities definitely becomes a prime concern.
    Apart from visual thing, there are foe nettic variants in Devanagari
  based languages.  So the example over here is the word Hindi in two
  different forms.  It's just that it has different storage, but while
  pronouncing, it is the same for everybody.  There are additionally
  linguistic variants as well.  So recently Bombay has changed its name
  from Bombay to mum bye.  For many people this is kind of variant.  When
  it doesn't matter whether they are talking in terms of Bombay or mum
  bye, they are talking about the same city and they know it.  For them
  it's not much of a different thing.  (.
    But what is the ground situation when it comes to the Devanagari
  script since it is a complex script, there are many accents to play in
  these scripts represented in the digital medium.  And some of the prime
  actors here are Internet browsers and the operating systems.  For all
  these to happen, it is not as same as like in script.  There is an
  original component that operating system inserts into the system that
  is rendering engine and it varies from each operating system to
  operating system.  That amounts to the differences in individual
  appearance of the characters.  Coming to the solutions part, this was
  one of the founding principles that whatever is the solution that would
  be proposed, it has to be -- the decision has to be definitive,
  nondisputed, and it has to be programmatically implementable.  Because
  the domain registration work, it's an automatic system and we cannot
  have a manual intervention into it.
    Ground relates about the kinds of variants we have is foe nettic
  variants, those are not definite.  Because dialect changes, phonetic
  variants change for people.  Those cannot be -- cognitive difference,
  some say mom bay and mum bye are different -- but it may not make
  difference for somebody else.  Visual variants are something which can
  be handled pro ma'am mat particularly but it calls for another thing to
  be resolved.  And had an is achieved through a term known as whole
  label evaluation roots.  I will try to touch upon that in my last
  slide.  (.
    So what ultimately the resolution will turn to.  It was that we can
  do visual variants and they can be accommodated into this process.
    But one of the key things that was discussed when we were discussing
  the visual variants is there an already existing ICANN process which
  deals with similarity.  Whenever string is delegated, there is string
  similarity tool that is -- which gives the similar look and feel of the
  already existing -- a primary thought is if something needs to be added
  it can be added to enhance that process.  But this visual similarity
  analysis calls for a given that is there are certain ways in which
  these languages are represented.  And if somebody wants to create
  something which looks similar to an already existing thing, that can be
  generated out if it is not a valid construct.
    So having a valid construct for a popular domain in the Devanagari
  based languages is definitely needed and that will be achieved through
  this whole level evaluation tools for the Devanagari.
    I have just given an example.  Like the second word is not well
  formed.  Even the third one is.  Whenever there would be some kind of
  validation that would be performed on this labels, and only those will
  pass the system which are valid as per the whole label evaluation
  roots.
    So these are two things that we have discussed and agreed upon that
  may happen.  Ultimately the decision will be they can recommend the
  community comes together and they discuss whatever the possible
  solutions.  But we think this should be sufficient for the case.
    Thank you.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, Akshat.  I forgot to introduce
  him.  Quite a few.  Akshat Joshi Joshi is project engineer from the
  centre for advanced developing community in India where ICANN
  established a centre of excellence for DNS security.  Josh yosh yes.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Yes.  Congratulations.  Next is Edmon, are
  you noted?
    Okay.  And Edmon Chung is CEO of DotAsia and chief engineer of
  society Hong Kong.  Edmon Chung thank you, Rinalia, and as I bring up
  my presentation -- one?
    It's already open.  Thank you.
    >> EDMON CHUNG:  ( I'm going to be going -- okay.
    So thank you, Rinalia, and Saverages rmad.
    I will talk a little about the experience from the Chinese community
  especially on driving the development on the Han script IDNs.  I
  thought I would start out with talking about what is an IDN variant?
    In fact unfortunately to disappoint you, one of the things that the
  community has really found ought is that it's sort of an elusive thing.
  So in the true spirit of the Internet and this multistakeholder
  approach that we talked about, this is kind of a -- we're not achieving
  full agreement on what an IDN variant is.  But if we can have enough
  agreement to work towards, you know -- to work together, that's really
  what it is.  But I still want to -- seeing some new faces around --
  this is kind of the worst, easiest to understand way to talk about IDN
  variants, I guess.
    It's that imagine that the capital letters and small letters are
  technically different on the DNS.  We might need to have policies to
  make them the same in a way.
    So this is a situation with simplified and traditional Chinese where
  we identified the issue.  Don't take that analogy too far because it
  will break down a lot of ways.  But that's the easy way to understand.
    So what they are, I guess a way to summarize that, these are things
  that have linguistic origins.  They're different characters that are
  being used.  Because of certain technical limitations of the DNS and of
  how we use the DNS, there are policy implementations that are required
  to implement IDN variants so that it is better used by Internet users
  when they use the Chinese domain name, for example.
    Hong already mentioned about the CDMC, the Chinese consortium formed
  in 2000 and a couple IETF RFCs were -- were created from the work.
  And -- along with other people as well.
    One is called the jet guidelines for IDN, another focus more on
  Chinese domain names.
    Another thing that is of importance, I guess, is a couple of IDN
  tables were submitted by C. N. Nick and T. W. Nick respectively.  And a
  couple years ago dot Asia ourselves also submitted a table that
  essentially put together the CN table and TW table.  And here is why.
  And I explain it because it's very relevant for our discussion at the
  root.  Which Andrew mentioned.  So as a basic, the policy is that if
  you applied for a simplified Chinese string or domain name, you would
  get the traditional Chinese string as well.
    As a variant.  And you would have reserved other types of strings
  that are basically generated from the table.  The challenge then for
  operating as a GTLD versus a CCTLD is that in the CN, TW, and also in
  this case Japanese tables, they have a context based on the TDL, krfrjs
  cTLD, like dot J. P., you would expect the Japanese, dot c n.  That's
  Chinese.  In the case of Asia, or TDLdsz.  There is no such context.
  And therefore additional considerations need to be made.  And such
  considerations need to be made both on utilizing simplified Chinese
  together with traditional Chinese as well as the overlap with Japanese
  Condi characters.  Here's a quick example of one of the characters
  which is somewhat interesting.  And this is a character that can mean
  here or development.  And there's also a Japanese congi character
  related to the set of Chinese characters.  And these are -- this is
  some of the issue -- one of the issues or actually one of the main
  issues that the -- when we talk about ( I guess Han script or Han
  characters are being used in the IDN in the root or in a GTLD context,
  we will probably need to consider the simplified Chinese context,
  traditional Chinese context, as well as Japanese congi context.  And
  although I've, you know -- talk about this as if there's a lot of
  problem, I think the community has spent the last 13, 14 years working
  out the solutions.  And I'm glad to -- well, at least I'm hopeful to
  say that we're quite confident that we have a pretty solid solution set
  based on policy implementation for IDN variants much.
    But that being said, I actually just before that -- one of the things
  that I wanted -- did want to bring out as well that you heard about
  Chinese both simplified and traditional and you heard about Japanese
  congi, one somewhat popularly used Han character usage in Korea, which
  is Korean Honja is not discussed.  Thaus that's because there is a very
  strong consensus in the community from Korea that Korean honja will not
  be aused or allowed for registration in the Korean IDN context and
  therefore they're not included.
    As a summary, the Han character IDNs really we're talking about --
  when we talk about in the GTLD context and that I guess that relates to
  the root context as well, we're talking about the sort of intersect
  or -- intersection or union of simplified Chinese, traditional Chinese
  and Japanese congi characters.
    And that brings me to I think what -- something that's even more
  important, I think, for this programme as well.  Which is the user
  experience.  Because ultimately the IDN variants are implemented,
  policies are implemented to enhance the user experience.  There are
  certain challenge, Internet user, registrants, registrars, hosts, how
  do they deal with the different variants that are essentially distinct
  DNS entries but how do they host it so that it's considered the same
  domain by policy or by somewhat with the same applicant -- with the
  same registrant?
    How do registrars and registries handle it?
    With that actually it relates very much to a problem which generally
  called the universal acceptance of DLDs or universal acceptance of
  IDNTDLs in this process?
    Similar problems, similars points of failures where ISPs might choke
  on IDN variants or TDLs.  There's a common interest being built between
  the ccTDLs and the country code domains and top level domains shall the
  key message I want to bring forward is this really requires
  industrywide collaboration.  And it's not just an ICANN issue and it is
  the whole user community and the technical community issue.
    So really what we're talking about is that a lot of times interfaces
  or applications, they have preset certain lists of TLDs.  You see a
  drop down box and if the new top of domain or new IDN top level domain
  is added, that field needs to be compatible.  Another type of scenario,
  if you try to sign on to a social network, for example, your email
  address or your URL, will that database accept IDNs?
    There's also the search engines and search engines have different
  components, the search results, the advertising results, and you know,
  some other results.  Will they accept IDNs especially variants, IDN
  variants as well?
    How do they relate?
    Emails of course, that's one of the top usage or domain names as
  well.
    And how would they -- how would email clients react?
    Why are they not accepted?
    A number of reasons why.  A lot of them are based on technical
  origins.  One of the reasons that we found is that a lot of
  applications or interfaces utilize hard coded list, they're not easily
  updated.  They might use different lists that are out there.  That is
  not fully synchronized with the ICANN root, the single root that Andrew
  mentioned about as well.
    And there are certain applications that check this length of the
  string.  So you know applications expect that top level domains are
  either two characters or three characters long.  But with an IDN
  because of the Puni code, the technical implementation it would be much
  longer.  How would these play?
    And of course there are other sort of gatekeepers as well.  Like spam
  filters, like invalid email addresses or invalid domain names.  Systems
  are out there that would need to know about IDNs that would need to
  know about IDN variants as well.
    With that, what has been done?
    Actually the ICANN SACK, this is not an entirely new issue, it's an
  issue that has been anticipated for a long time.  When new GTLDs were
  introduced, info and dot museum, some of the issues surfaced.  And the
  SCAK came out with a report, with a number of recommendations.  ICANN
  has implemented a number of them.  Not all of them have been
  implemented.  A couple of them that -- that has been implemented
  inclusion a TLDverification code that ICANN has produced and hopefully
  more people will be using it many there's also a draft set of outreach
  materials that are being developed.  And frankly, a joint working group
  between the CCNSO, and GNSO is putting out a number of recommendations
  to -- and Hopefully this will be -- the process will be completed and
  the two councils will be presenting this -- these set of
  recommendations to -- back to the board, ICANN board.  One of the key
  recommendations there is to at least get our own act together.  Because
  what is interesting is that we look at some of the registries and
  registrars who offer IDN TLDs, they themselves have their own systems,
  may not be fully compliant or may not be fully embracing IDN TLDs or
  especially IDN variants in like email addresses or like name server
  records for domain names.  This is an issue.  Beau the acceptance of
  IDN TLDs, and especially the accent tans of IDN variant TLDs.  Or
  variants in general.  This is an issue that unless we address it as a
  whole, will continue and will be amplified, especially when we see IDN
  ccTLDs being implemented now and of course we recently heard -- know
  that IDN GTLDs are also being implemented into the root.  So with that,
  thank you.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, Edmon.  I think it would be fair
  to say that universal acceptance is probably the highest on the end
  user community agenda in terms of problem.
    So I'd like to go around the room and see if there are any questions
  or concerns.  And I know we're running out of time, but I will take a
  little bit more time.
    Any questions?
    Is your hand up?
    I see Olivia and then Huru.
    >> Owe life yo: .  Of lecture.  We've spoken about universal
  acceptance and user -- user ability by the user community.  What's the
  status with regards to the actual applications running and their
  ability to use those new IDNs?
    Email, Web browsers, et cetera?
    I sew know some perform some verification and some might not call for
  any more.  Is there any status on this as well?
    >>
    >> ANDREW SULLIVAN:  The short answer is that on the Internet,
  because it's a permissionless system, there's end to end, the
  innovation is really at the edges.
    It's very difficult to guarantee universal acceptance of anything.
  What we do know is that we went through a round of this back in 2001
  when we added some top level labels that were longer than
  traditionally.  And they haven't worked consistently everywhere, some
  of them still to this day.
    So I think we should expect that there are going to be some barriers
  and there's going to be some difficulty.  Not because they won't work
  in the DNS, but because they won't work in certain applications or
  something like that.  There's nothing to do about that except to
  encourage people not to do that.
    I will say there are some technical work going on to try to
  discourage some of the sis at the presents that have traditionally been
  used in order to do this.  Including some work just to toot my own
  horn, some work I have tried to push through the ITF in order to
  suggest a new way of tracking what is a legitimate top level label and
  what is not.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, Andrew.  I think RAM also wants
  to respond to that question.  Go ahead, RAM.
    >> RAM MOHAN:  Just a wrap-up, not a question itself.  So I can
  take -- raim thank you for that question.  Huru, you had a question?
    >> Thank you.  This is Huru, from the J. P.  I have a question about
  the requirement for the variants.  Today's session I think is mainly
  focussed on the definition of IDN variants.
    On top of that, there should be some requirements such as -- as
  Andrew said, allowing location of some IDN variants to the same
  applicant.
    So it's related to the last part of Edmon's presentation.  Or they
  may be touched on Edmon's presentations in a way.
    But on top of that, then a need of some requirement, or is there any
  possible further requirements for the resolution of the variants?
    Of the domain name such as variants of a domain name should be
  reserved to the same IP address?
    Which may be good from the aspect of user experience.
    Was this kind of topic discussed?
    Maybe I'm wrong but universal acceptance seems to be now focussed on
  the unique user experience across TLDs, but how about the user
  experience among variants?
    >> EDMON CHUNG:  If I got your question correctly, you're talking
  about a potential discussion about a requirement for handling IDN
  variants and how it's put into the DNS.
    The current -- at least my current thinking or at least the Chinese
  experience is to say that on a registry point of view, to allocate it
  to the same applicant, and also to delegate to the same set of name
  serve offers.
    As to the IP address that is being used, if you are talking about an
  end resource like a website, or a Web -- resource, I personally think
  that might not be what -- at least at the ICANN level, registry level
  we should be regulating or trying to at least make a definitive
  coordination.
    I think if we allocate it to the same applicant and delegate to the
  same set of name servers, that should provide the -- enough kind of
  package for users and registrants as well.
    I put out an example.  Like for example in simplified Chinese and
  traditional Chinese nooez, it is quite possible, in fact we are seeing
  that happen is that the -- the registrant for a domain name would set
  the simplified Chinese to Web servers in China and set the traditional
  Chinese to Web servers in Hong Kong or Taiwan.  So the end record, the
  IP address of the resource may not be the same.
    But in set of name servers on the registrant should be the same.
  So...
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, Edmon.  I think RAM wants to
  respond to Huru's question, is that right?
    >> RAM MOHAN:  Thank you very much.  I think this is an area where
  one size does not fit all.  Depending on the local, depending on the
  registry, and most importantly, depending on the user community (, the
  decision needs to be made as to whether variants should point to the
  same place or to other places.
    In general I agree with Edmon that it's not an area for regulation.
  But at the same time I think it's important to note the distinction
  that within the registry it might be very useful to have consistency
  over policy about what happens to variants.  But across registries,
  there probably ought to be a space for variation depending on locale,
  community, and type of TLD.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Are you happy with that response, Huru?
    Any other questions around the table?
    I'll look to this side first.
    Go ahead, clep clep clep.
    >> OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND:  Thank you, very much.  I understand the
  Chinese one has reached the end of its work -- there might not be an
  end to the work.  Ongoing work in the Chinese one.  An Arabic one
  started.  Is there a calendar of the start of other task forces with
  regard to other scripts as well?
    >> We just talked about that.  We opened, we made a call for
  application for the panels.  That are going to form the LGR for each
  script.  And that just happened in July.  So we'll see -- we received a
  few.  We expect the first panel will be formed before the end of this
  year.  And so we expect about 17 scripts that will participate.  So
  we're waiting for that to happen.  So it's just happening now.  So...
    >> EDMON CHUNG:  Just to clarify, I think owe life yea, you are
  you're asking there has been a lot of community work done in different
  communities and Chinese started way -- a long time ago.  But the LGR
  process in the root, that is just beginning.  (.
    So each of those panels are just being formed.  So none of them -- I
  don't think any of them have been formed yet.  So it will be formed.
    And -- but the work will not be wasted.  I mean work from the
  community from long time could be utilized and hopefully quickly come
  to conclusion with those panels.
    >> ANDREW SULLIVAN:  A key piece of this, though -- I just wanted to
  emphasize this because I don't think I made it clear earlier.  A key
  part of the design and part of the reason there's this complicated
  two-Phase sort of permit procedure is that the integration panel can
  actually start producing label generation rules before all of the
  characters in the world have been considered.
    So the -- part of the point of the design is to make it possible that
  if, for instance, people -- the Chinese community and the Arabic
  community and -- maybe just those two -- are ready.  And nobody else
  has done any work yet.  You know, everybody in the world doesn't have
  to wait until all of the languages in the world have been solved.
  Because the truth of the matter is we know that there are some
  languages that are active in the world and they're encoded in Uni,
  code, their writing is in Uni code, there are no speakers on the
  Internet and though don't care about those labels and they're not going
  to show up.  We wanted to have a system that allowed that.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  You have a follow upquestion, owe life yea?
    >> OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND:  It's very short.  Who to contact or where
  to go if you want to get involved.  There's a lot of people who have no
  idea but they know something's happening and I think it would be good
  to make it clear what's their first point of contact?
    >> So the team in charge of that in ICANN staff is Niela and
  Nicoletta, if I'm not mistaken.  They are able to facilitate this.
  There is a lot of information online on the ICANN.org website on that.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Any other questions around the table?
    Before we go, Andrew, can you clarify -- because some people have
  commented on it -- there seems to be the lack of an appeal process.
  For example, in a generation panel submits proposal, it is rejected by
  the integration panel and integration panel provides an explanation.
  And somehow the community is not happy.  What is the recourse?
    >> Sul there are three thing toss say about that.  This is actually
  the expression of the conservatism principle.  The point of having this
  integration panel and its unanimity provision is there is this
  conservatism principle.  If you have people who have doubts and they're
  presumably widely regarded experts, not just random people, then
  they're in a position to say, you know, there's this problem and the
  conservatism principle says that we think there's a problem, we can't
  go ahead.  That's the reason for it.  You're right near's not an appeal
  process but there is sort of an endless loop that can go there.  (.
    Right?
    (Sullivan) so there is intended to be actually public negotiation of
  this.  And this is the reason that it depends on the public comment
  period and so on.  Because the integration panel doesn't just get to
  say no, go away.  They have to defend themselves in public.  And if
  they can't defend themself, then at some point the integration panel is
  ill legitimate and the answer is you file the integration panel.
    So the idea is really genuinely that this be a multistakeholder
  process that is held in public and open and transparent.  And if
  openness and transparency doesn't solve our problem for the operation
  of the root zone, then we don't have a recourse.  We're out of luck at
  that point.  And I think that that's actually just the truth about
  this.  There is no way that we can come along and say no, we're going
  to cut the baby in half and make the decision.  You don't get to do
  that.
    So unfortunately you know, that's not a very satisfying answer.  Veng
  we would like to have an appeals process many but my feeling when I was
  working on this -- because I remember having discussions about this at
  the time, my feeling always was, as soon as I -- as soon as we invernt
  an appeals process the next day it will be to invent the appeals
  process for the appeals process and eventually we get to the turtles
  all the way down.  So I thought we could stop at the first turtle.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you.  We've come to the end of our
  session and RAM would like to wrap the session up.  Go ahead, RAM.
    >> RAM MOHAN:  Thank you.
    While many items roo he main in local languages, as in natural home
  domain system, the need for the full expression of humankind, language
  system and the Internet domain name system is critical.  This is
  important work.  But it's also complex work, as you saw from the
  panelists.  So therefore we should expect this work will take some time
  to come to fruition.  But of the very large number of things that
  organisation ought to do in the public interest, nothing else feels as
  important as enablement of languages in the domain name system.  After
  all, what is more natural than being able to express yourself in your
  own language and in your own script?
    So Rinalia, thank you for putting this together and I hope the
  session was a value to everybody.
    >> RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:  Thank you, RAM.  Please join me in thanking
  the panelists and also for your patience in joining us today.
                (Applause)
                -END-

