WS 217 NEW GLTD PROGRAM MEANS FOR YOU 




EIGHTH INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM
BALI 
BUILDING BRIDGES  ENHANCING MULTISTAKEHOLDER COOPERATION FOR GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
OCTOBER 23, 2013
4:30 P.M.  
SESSION WS 217  
NEW GLTD PROGRAM MEANS FOR YOU
 

The following is the output of the real-time captioning taken during the Eigth Meeting of the IGF, in Bali, Indonesia. Although it is largely accurate, in some cases it may be incomplete or inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to understanding the proceedings at the session, but should not be treated as an authoritative record.

 
 
Mediterranean Federation of Internet Associations. 
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: We will be starting in about three or four minutes.  We are missing one panelist. 
Thank you for how you increased the audience for by 10%.  You need to be up here.  I will start because I can see an eager crowd, and a desire to ask a lot of questions.  This is the workshop about new gTLD and what it might or might not mean for you.  My name is Chris Disspain.  I will have the panelist,.
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: I'm Akram Atallah, with ICANN.
>> HEATHER DRYDEN: My name is Heather Dryden, I work for the Canadian department of industry and I chair the governmental advisory committee at ICANN.
>> JANIS KARKLINS: I'm Jan Janis Karklins.
>> Paul Mitchell with Microsoft.
>> TIJANI BNE JEMAA: Tijani Ben Jemaa I'm with the African regional at large organisation.  I'm the vice chair and also I am a member of the ALAC, the AtLarge Advisory Committee at ICANN.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Okay.  So we are going to cover sort of five rough areas, the first is that Akram is going to give us an update on the program, where we are at, talk a bit about evaluation, strengths, contentions and then we'll take questions on anything that he says, and they we'll go to the role of governments in the process, and Heather, not surprisingly, is going to talk about that.  And we'll take questions.  And then Paul will discuss the business aspects.  And Janis is going to talk about IDMs and their impact and then Tijani is going to talk about the developing economies and the impact of new gTLDs on that.
And at each stage, we want this to be as interactive as possible, so please when we come to the end of a brief presentation, ask questions, and make comments, et cetera.
So Akram, do you want to start us rolling with an update of where we are and all of that stuff?
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: Thank you.  Thank you, Chris.
So we have started the new gTLD program with  about 1930 applications and over past few months, we have actually had a few withdrawals.  The rest of the applications moved forward toward the initial evaluation and right now err practically done with the initial evaluation.  The majority passed.  There were a handful that didn't.  And some applications went into extended evaluation.
All of applications that passed initial evaluation moved forward to basically go into a contracting phase.  In between the contracting and the initial evaluation, there are applications that have objections against them, or that have contentions.  So more than one application applying for the same strength and some of them were held back due to GAC advice to the board of ICANN.
So these applications are now still in the  you know, in the phase where they are sorting out their issues before they can move to contracting.
In the contracting phase, we have signed already over 60 contracts, and once the contracts were signed, some of these applications moved to what we call predelegation testing and out of predelegation testing, there are four applications that passed that and these four applications have moved into delegation right now.  In a few hours we expect them to be en route.
The four applications that moved forward are all IDNs, which is scripts that are different than the Latin script, basically.  And that was one of the goals of the program is to promote choice and diversity in the TLD space.
Those applications, one is Arabic, two Russian and one Chinese scripts, and every  at every phase of the program, every week, the  the program is  reviews the standings of all the application in that phase and then moves forward according to the priorities that have been assigned.  So we will see the first few applications will be the majority IDNs but some of them will start coming in from the Latin script as well, which is the majority of the applications.
We have also managed the issue of collisions that was initially brought up about security of the DNS, and we have managed to develop a plan to allow the applications to move forward while mitigating all the risks of collision.
We are also working through the objection processes.  I know there's a lot of concerns about the strengths, similarities and other issues within the objection processes and all of these are being addressed with the new gTLD committee of the board of ICANN and we will be reviewing all of these decisions and deciding how to move forward.
The GAC advice, the majority of the GAC advice has been taken  accepted by the board, and we are working on implementation of these advice as well.  So we believe the program is moving very well, you know, very carefully, but at the same time, with expeditiously as well.  So we think the program is very successful and we hope to see very many more delegations to happen every week, starting next week.
Thank you.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: So Akram, could you just explain, so I'm delegated today.  What does happens next?  Am I immediately live?
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: Good question, Chris.  When we release someone's delegation, that means we give them a token and we say you have passed all the requirements of the program and now you go through the IANA process.  Once you go through the IANA process, then they check their token, checks their information, makes sure that they meet all of the IANA requirements and then they put them in the root.
(No audio).
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: So that would mean then if I was put into the route today, the absolute minimum time before someone could buy a name in my gTLD would be 
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: 60 days.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: 60 days.  Okay.  Nip want to ask any questions about that update on where we are? 
Okay, well, obviously not, but we will get back to it.
So Heather, can you talk about the role that governments have played in the process, the early warning, you know, what standing that GAC advice has and generally how govs are fitted into this process?
>> HEATHER DRYDEN: Sure.  Okay.  So the governmental advisory committee at ICANN plays an advisory role to advise on public policy issues that arise as a result of ICANN's coordination role for the names and numbers for the Internet.  And so a variety public policy issues do come up, and so the  the GAC as we call it, works on a consensus basis, in order to generate input and be influential on the decision making at ICANN.
Because the gTLD program was really quite a broad program in the sense that there were many kinds of top level domains that could or perhaps would be applied for, it was really quite a lengthy process to come up with rules and to anticipate the kinds of issues or challenges or even sensitivities that could arise with such a broad undertaking.
So naturally, governments had concerns that perhaps some of the top level domains that would be applied for would be controversial or sensitive from a governmental perspective.  As a result, the GAC, at various stages made proposals in order to anticipate some of these sensitivities arising, as a result of applications and identifying ways that, in fact, they could be addressed and hopefully resolved depending on the nature of the issue. 
When the GAC first looked at the these  the kinds of mechanisms or approaches that could be employed, there was a lot of discussion about categories.  So in other words, if you tried to create categories in advance of inviting the applications, then you could identify as well rules to cover each particular kind and perhaps make it easier to  to manage those issues, however, at the end of a lengthy consultation process with the GAC and the board and the community, what was arrived at was a process more or less in two phases, although they are not distinct phases, where the GAC would have a means for raising sensitivities.  So the first was called early warnings.
So almost one year ago, individual GAC members, individual governments were able to raise their concerns via the GAC, and issue what were called early warnings to the community.  And in total 242 of these were issued.  Interestingly, 129 of those were from Australia.  So Chris, I don't know whether you as an Australian would have comment on that.
But nevertheless, a variety of concerns were raised, clearly a number of them touched upon geographic or socalled geographic top level domains and really before the application round was opened, it was good reason to believe that these would be sensitive, because whenever this issue has come up, it's been clear that the governments do have, as they see it, a considerable interest in how geographic terms, are, in fact, treated as a part of a process like this.
So the idea is if you issue an early warning to the community, and to the applicant in particular, that you create an opportunity for the parties to resolve their differences and hopefully in such a way that there are no further issues with that application proceeding, at least from the perspective of that government, and certainly the GAC would not have a further view to consider on those.  And I think in a number of instances this proved to be quite successful, and there was a good faith effort on the part of governments issuing early warnings and those receiving them to try to resolve those issues.
However, of course, not all issues can be resolved and in anticipation of that, there was the possibility outlined in advance for another kind of mechanism called GAC advice, speckly, GAC objections.  So if there is an application, if there is a string where a government still has a concern and the early warnings really prove to be a good guide for what could be a concern later on, then it's possible for those governments to come to the GAC as a whole and to raise concerns with the community and to, perhaps, raise the early warning to the level of the GAC.
And it's the case that other colleagues and other governments in the GAC did not want to stand in the way of those consensus objections then, in fact, the GAC would successfully issue consensus objections.  So this has happened in a number of cases.  There are a few strings that remain on the GAC's agenda for discussion, but for the most part, the GAC has worked its way through most of the applications, most of its strings and most of the issues that have arisen.
So for the most part, you can say this was very successful.  We have found, of course, that there were a few areas where, perhaps, we didn't fully anticipate certain issues to come up, and perhaps in the future, we might actually refine these processes and that's something that we will need to think about in the future, particularly if there are future grounds for new gTLDs.
So I think, in carrying out these mechanisms, it was an important test for the GAC, but one that does have its challenges and as a result of that, we do have a few more issues that remain on our agenda.
But clearly, geographical terms are sensitive to governments, but it does help to have rules laid out in advance, and in some ways, I think it's been hard once the nature of the applications have been seen to, perhaps, keep as closely to those rules and processes as it would have been if, perhaps, the issues were better understood beforehand.
So, perhaps I could stop here and we can talk a bit more about some of that, if there's interest in further discussion.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Yeah.  I mean, I think if anybody wants to ask a question, just raise your hand or make a comment.  I think it's important that  this is kind of been a coming of age experience for the GAC in the sense that it's a really hard kind of nutty government issues to be dealt with and it's the  it's my personal view, it's probably the first time that the GAC is really, really had to deal with real life make or break, this makes a huge difference to our stuff, in the sense of stopping things from happening, xxx was the first.
You were there, you talk about that.  You should  that will teach you.  I mean, you know, I would be interested in hearing what you have to say.  You have nothing to say.  Okay.
Heather has something to say.  Go ahead, Heather.
>> HEATHER DRYDEN: I think it's helpful for you to raise this example, because, in fact, the experience with dotxxx was the first example of a controversial domain being discussed within the ICANN processes and that was the example that GAC members were referring to when trying to lay out the processes and put detail to these mechanisms that I have described.
And, you know, I think that it's really the most important case for dealing with such issues. 
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thank you, Jim.
>> JIM PRENDERGAST:  I have been working with several applications, some of which have been the subject of early warnings.  I would say that I thought that program worked really well.  It gave an opportunity for governments and applicants to discuss issues, resolve them in a timely manner and then be able to move on.  I think it's definitely something that I thought worked very well in the program.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thank you.  Gentlemen in the back there, yes, go ahead, sir.
>> PARTICIPANT: Oh, hi, Dave Moscovitz from internet New Zealand.  You mentioned geographic names being a sensitivity.  What were the other sort of classes of names where you experienced sensitivity?
>> HEATHER DRYDEN: So I will try to recall from the top of my mind, but there certainly were sensitive, at least with some terms that were religious and then they have an additional layer of sensitivity to them because some really are not supportive of governments commenting on that as related to religion.  So that was interesting for the GAC to handle.
And there are often geopolitical issues associated with those in addition, as well we  let's think.  We had  oh, yes, you reminded me of safeguards.  Thank you, Akram.  So the GAC as well came up with various sets of what we were calling safeguards and that was to deal with, among other things, top level domains that were applied for that represented a regulated market.
So if you can imagine applications for top of domains related to the financial industry, banking, those sorts of activities, then you would have an enhanced concern from the consumer protection point of view.  And so it was believed that the GAC, the particular requirements should be placed on those applicants given the associated risks of operating a top level domain like that.  So there are quite a few safeguards that we came up with to deal with various problems.
It closed at or exclusive access was also an issue.  So if you applied for a generic term, that was representing an industry and was perhaps closely associated with the kind of business you were, and they were proposing to not allow others to register in that top level domain, it was viewed as being  there being potential for anticompetitive type activity or for it to not really be in the interest of the users using these top level domains.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thanks, Heather.
Let's move on to Paul, Paul if you could just address it from the applicant's side.  And just a general gTLD applicant.
>> PAUL MITCHELL:  Sure.  So Microsoft is kind of interesting in that as this whole process was going along, we were also in the beginning stages of redefining the direction the company was moving.  So if we go back four or five years, it was very clear, we were a company that did  that created a variety of software products for the enterprises and consumers and the wellknown operating system called Windows.  And many of those products, you know, talked on the Internet and worked on the Internet but we hadn't come around to our sort of integrated services and delivery until basically this year.
One exception to that was the Xbox.  So those of you who are familiar with Xbox know that its distinguishing feature when the product was launched in 2000 was the fact that it had the capability to have a network of connected game playing.
So with that as the backdrop, and being a company of 100,000 people that operates in 140 countries, and is essentially has fully distributed businesses, our challenge was what is our strategy for this new domain thing?  We obviously have to think about it.  But the question was:  Who gets to think about it?  Because the way our businesses were aligns, you had the Office business, the Windows business, the Xbox business, the phone business, a few other things that were all businesses and we don't have and did not have sort of a central bureaucratic planning organisation.
So Microsoft did what we usually do, which was we created a virtual team that looks at the issue and tries to come up with a strategy.  We decided there were really a couple of strategies that we could pursue.  One strategy was the category strategy.  Let's just think of all the things that could be categories and see if we could get a top level domain for that category, cats, dogs, pets, whatever.  We had no clue what the business might be if we did, that but we thought that was a strategy.
And the flip side strategy was, well, we have  we have our brands, our big brands, and we have communities of users that are built around those brands to more or less extend.  So the  you know, the classic one is obviously Xbox, the live community there, but we have a variety of other communities across the other brands.
And so as we thought about it, we thought what we really should do is go with a brand strategy, the brands are strong, and they have community associations.  Now, how do we actually do that?
Well, one of our challenges is that some of our brands are just generic words, Windows, for example, or Office, but nevertheless, we put together our RV team and cycled this around the company, around the various geographies and ultimately got to the point where we applied for four 11 top level domains which are the top four Microsoft brands.
As we did that, there were several things that were notable to us as part of the process and important to us as an owner of valuable brands.  One of them probably the most important was the recognition that the brands themselves had value, their intellectual property value, and the necessary protections  to have the necessary protections in place so that the brands, our brands could not be abused by others.
We have had the history of having early on in previous domain registration periods, we have had our brands misrepresented and  and learned a lot about how to manage ourselves on the Internet addressing that.  So the fact that the brand protections were, in fact, part of the process, that ICANN had come up with was very important to us.
So we, for those of you who follow the comment periods, we have been quite vocal along the way as to ways to strengthen those processes, how those processes should operate, you know, across the board, but I think, you know, the message I would leave you with on this front, and then we can talk later in Q&A, I guess, wherever you want to go with this, is that from the perspective of a brand owner, the critical thing for us was the ability to strengthen and protect the brand, and be able to leverage it and control its meaning, the same way as we can in print, in, you know, other types of media, on product packaging and be able to build out the extension.
In a way, if you think about what is happening in media, completely separate from the Internet, we used to have television shows that ran on TV at a time slot and that was it.  Now we have complete media experiences like "Game of Thrones" and tings like that, that transcend all types of medium, from video to the online property to books, and all of those things that sort of complete brand management is part of what happens in media in this context, we are looking to this entire process to be able to extend our own management of our own brands directly to the community.
Now, the last thing I will say that about that is I mentioned in the beginning, we are in the middle of this transition of being this sort of vertical individual businesses to being a devices and services company in which the thing that we sell is this integration between the service and whatever device you are using it on, whether it's a PC, a tablet, a phone or television set, game console.
And that creates an entirely new category of necessary marketing and attachment and affinity building and that's sort of the critical element that we are looking to with the strategy we are pursuing.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Okay.  I'm thinking we might just hold questions and comments and go to Janis and Tijani.  Janis, do you want to tackle the IDN mountain? 
>> JANIS KARKLINS: Yes, thank you.  Thank you, Chris.  Speaking about IDNs or talk about IDNs, at ICANN, it started with the integration of IDN CCOD and, of course, now after the years, after the launch of the first modern, after the launch of the first IDN ccTLD strings, we can really start drawing, of course, lessons from that experience because we certainly have not deviated from the understanding or the premises that IDN is something that's very good that's meant to promote the use of different languages on the net.  And it allows, potentially, joint network, citizenry, those who don't master any language using any script.  Of course, we must probably think that everybody on this planet, master Latin script.  But believe me, there are millions and billions of people who Latin script is the same for us as Chinese characters.  So therefore, the value of IDNs in general is to bring to the  to the Internet, those who are not able to use Latin script on top of strengthening emotional affiliation of those who master different languages to the use of their mother tongue on the net.
Together, in order to understand what is  what are the consequences or first lessons of introduction of IDNs, together with the EURid, we are third year in a row making analysis of the uptake of IDNs in ccTLD space and EURid publishes global port with support of UNESCO and also this year Verisign, where this analysis is made and which  this analysis is based on examples last year rather small set of domain names.  This year we were lucky to accelerate on very large number of domain names.
I would be not willing to go into very detailed explanation on the conclusions.  I would rather invite you to come tomorrow at 11:00 to listen to my preparation of the 2013 report.  Nevertheless, I will maybe disclose a few features which I think are important.
We are analyzing IDN ccTLD uptake last year.  We tame to the conclusion that there are two group issues.  One group of issues relates to organisational issues, meaning registration, awareness, registration policies, awareness, and another group of issues is linked to technical aspect and user experience.
Speaking about first group of issues, it was very clear that uptake of IDN ccTLDs were very much related to the liberalization of registration policies, and we saw that in countries like, for instance, Russia, where registration policies are  the height around the first introduction was very high and there was an exponential growth of IDN ccTLD registration and domain possibilities.
In other countries where registration policies were much more restrictive, we saw  we did not see this hype and we saw very kind of limited and not very big uptake from registration.
This year, apart from registration policies, which were addressed in the last year's report, we identified the that the public awareness is not sufficient and that also explains that there's no bigger number of registration.  If they are speaking in relative terms, today, IDNs in all forms, IDNs represent about 2% of all domain names.  That is certainly not enough.  The number is growing and we believe that with  now with the launch of first generic IDN names, this number will be steadily growing.
On other side of the questions related to user experience, and technical issues, and what we discovered that one of the main obstacle from user experience point of view was lack of email service in IDNs.  ITF in 2011, or maybe early '12 adopted IDN email product.  Well, that IDN email protocol is not yet fully embraced by all service providers and the first email  fully IDN email was sent in 2012 by users using that protocol.
Of course, we hope that this protocol will be widely applied in all different services.  What  what other elements of this negative experience?  Even if, for instance, in one case IDN email went out from the sender, it did not necessarily arrive.  With such a negative experience, people did not feel very comfortable and the hype of registration went down because of this negativity.
As well as, the other elements, the majority of popular browsers do not master fully IDNs and you cannot use IDN URLs and there are technical issues related to that.
In this year, we saw improvement in our services related to normal applications when it comes to model applications, the situation is still unsatisfactory and so their movement in using IDNs hasn't really started yet.
And as a result, we see that there is a kind of vicious circle where the negative or poor user experience leads to low user uptake in IDNs, low user uptake does not generate sufficient hype around it, so that leads to low user awareness, low user awareness, again, comes to blow the uptake and we need to break this vicious circle by most probably giving sufficient user experience and putting emphasis on both, of course, sides of the technical side, and registration side or organisation.
This year, based on previous years' IDN uptake report, the Director General of UNESCO made the public statement where she congratulated technical community for the work which has been done so far in making use of IDNs possible in cyberspace.  And challenges them to continue working on that and as we say, we overstepped the dog.  Now we need to overstep the tail.
So really to fix those few remaining technical issues specifically related to user experience, that could allow everybody who does not have character or keyboard, the fully embrace the benefits of IDN.
So for more details and maybe more technical details, please come tomorrow at 11:00 in room 5, where the 2013 world report on uptake will be given and we will give a more detailed presentation than I did today. 
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thank you, Janis. 
We'll hear from Tijani and then we'll take comments and questions from the floor on any aspects of gTLDs at all.  Tijani.
>> TIJANI BNE JEMAA: Thank you, Chris.  So you asked me what is the the gTLD program on the global economies and the poorer communities.  Let me first explain you what happened.  Since the first draft of the applicant guidebook, a big concern was raised by the community about the application cost.  ICANN said that it wants to recover money that was spent on this program and the community say you are excluding developing economies and poor communities.
This fight continued like this until Nairobi where the board adopted the resolution 20, asking the community to form a working group to see how we can assist needy applicants to apply for and to operate gTLD.
So this is one aspect. 
The second aspect is that the new gTLD program was not promoted or advised for in the developing economy regions.  It was done for the north but not from the south while in the north they didn't need it a lot, and in the south, it was necessary.  It was compulsory.  If you don't do, it people will not know about it.  So the working group was formed and working for two years, very hard work and issuing the final report.  And then a support program for the applicants was adopted by ICANN and ICANN created the fund of $2 million which is very good, which is something very positive result.
Those $2 million was able to help till 14 applicants, but when we wrote the recommendations of the just group, we didn't want the system to be gamed.  The result of all of this is that those tough criteria didn't  they didn't let people apply and the  the applicant support program, because if you apply under this program, and you don't meet the criteria, you will be excluded, totally excluded from the program.  You are not able to apply as a normal applicants.  So this is one element that make  that say needy applicants don't apply under this applicant's support program.
A lot of elements made that the applicants from the developing economies and from poor communities who didn't apply.  The result was there, over 1930 applications received, less than 1% came from Africa.  And only 1.25% came from Latin America and Caribbean region.
So what is the impact of this program on those regions?  Almost nothing.
Moreover, when the applicant support program was applied, was implemented, only three applicants applied for it, and after evaluation, only one was supported while we had money for '14.  So I'm afraid that the developing economies and the poor communities didn't benefit from this program at all.  And I hope that for the upcoming grants if there is upcoming grants, that things will change and we have to look to this applicant support program in another way.  We have to put other criteria that are  that will permit better result for this program and also very important ICANN should make a lot of announcements in the poorer regions for the new gTLD program.
Thank you. 
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thank you.
So we are going to take some questions from the floor.  JC, you had your hand up earlier on at gentleman behind is next.  So JeanChristophe.
>> PARTICIPANT: Would it be true, my name is Muju and I'm from Zimbabwe.
Would it be true to say that the new gTLD  the new gTLD, I mean, program, was not well publicized in the developing communities?  Would it be true to say it? 
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: So are you asking if  you are asking whether it would be true to say that the gTLD program wasn't advertised in the developing world?  Akram? 
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: So, the new gTLD program had a campaign for outreach, and to let as many people in the developing  I will rephrase that.  As many companies in the developing world know about the program.  But the world is pretty large.  To actually say we covered everywhere, I cannot say that.  I think that we have had a lot of reach.  Some areas more than others.  We have received over 100 IDNs which is actually a measure of not the total registrations of our applications that came globally, but specifically registrations with a different script than the Latin script.  So we have had a, you know, a few from Africa, and a few from Latin America, a lot more from Asia.
So we have had the global uptake of the program, and I think that actually the best advertisement is when this round goes live.  That's when everyone is going to be aware of the new gTLD program, and everybody will know that there is this opportunity to address it at the root level.  And that would be the benefit of this round for the next round.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thank you, Akram.
This is on the point that we were talking about.  Tijani, I want to put a proposition to you.  What would you say to the argument that it's actually been a success in the developing world as Akram said, in the sense that we now have not just ccTLDs IDNs, but gTLDs IDNs and they are able to access the Internet not just on the computer but the mobile phones and the concept of having actual gTLDs themselves pay have been sort of too much to bite off too soon and you have to build more slowly with your capacity building rather than taking large bite out of cake.
>> TIJANI BNE JEMAA: Before answering your question, I am afraid I will disagree with my friend Akram.  Because the outreach campaign was postally done in 9 developing world.  And at the end, they told us that the campaign will be online.  It was in social media, et cetera.  Knowing that, the people would are the most connected are people from the north.  So I think for the south, you need human presence and you need real event with a lot of noise so that people know that there is something, perhaps, interesting for their business.
Now, coming back to your question, yes, you are right.  I agree with you, but I think that we lost also another opportunity for the first round and it could be better then  I'm sure it could be better than if the outreach was done in the right way, and also if our criteria wasn't done in this way, so that we lost up to 13 supports for applicants. 
Thank you. 
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thank you.  Now JC, over to you. 
>> PARTICIPANT: Yes, I'm sorry.  Good afternoon, JeanChristophe.  The question is for the gentleman from Microsoft.  I'm sorry, I don't remember your name.  In a previous line, to use Chris' expression, I was involved in helping companies get into gTLDs.  It's very refreshing to hear of a company with an actual plan, and we registered because we could or because we had to because of different reasons.  First of all, congratulations for that.
The other question is that given that you had a whole team working on it, and that you seem to have a way of doing things, without, of course, going into details, I would say, how ready are you and basically, are you waiting for, well, the great day that we had yesterday, where some TLDs were in the route to push the baton then the Microsoft users would be be able to use the TLDs as quickly as possible or is it something that you still need to think about.
>> PAUL MITCHELL:  Okay.  Thank you for the question.  So the engineering, accurately, has been moving along in terms of what we have to do in order to be able to operate a registry and to do that well, and be ready for delegations.  So all of that work is going on and as far as I'm aware, as of today it's more or less on schedule without a lot of hiccups.  I think the question actually raises a broader issue, which I think applies to everyone who is getting to a couple of domains and anyone would then registers inside of them, which is how do the end users out there, the netizens come across these things.
All right, there's more to it than just getting  at least from our perspective, just getting the domain and pushing it live.  The reality is that we need a strategy for communicating what these new domains are, why they exist, why they are beneficial to whatever the particular purpose might be for Xbox or whatever, and then there's other engineering work that has to go on in the  in the browsers and the search engines that help people figure out where to go.  So, you know, today the browsers 3ws typically will iterate through EDU, dotcom, whatever, if you just enter a word, right? 
Well, now we are going to have several more of those.  I mean, not just the Microsoft one, there's a lot.  So I think it's fair to say we don't really know how we are going to deal with that from the browser perspective yet, or from an even more interesting perspective is that we are now increasingly in an app world on mobile devices that  where all of those URLs actually still have meaning and they are there.  They are part of the ecosystem, but they are approached in a different way.  They are  you know, the access to them is handled differently.
We haven't thought through all of those implications yet.  So I guess it's  it's saying, on the registry side, we'll be pretty ready, pretty soon to do things.
On the  is the rest of the ecosystem ready?  And are we ready to figure out how to communicate globally what these all are?  That's a lot of work that still has to be done.  And I think  I think that's broadly the case for the community as a whole.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: I think that's probably true.  I mean from the Australian perspective, I can tell you that we have got  we think that it's the brand TLDs that will educate the public with these things.  We think it's highly unlikely that, you know, anyone involved in dot shop, that dot shop is going to be pretty big in Australia any time soon, but we think that the Australian public will certainly know about the banks, the three of our top four banks, string and probably dot Sydney and dot Melbourne and dot afl, and that's about sports.
And then it's a question of whether we might find ourselves in such a lag that the early adopters  (Inaudible).
>> PAUL MITCHELL:  And I think part of the problem with these is to teach the people what the value is and what they mean.  I mean the netizens.  What is going to something something dot Microsoft or Microsoft.com.  If there's no definite difference, if we can't create a difference in value somehow or other, then one ends up being a constitution for the other and we haven't done anything significant.  It's pretty clear, if you look at  if you say Xbox, that's a nice, easy community to look at.  There's millions of accounts globally that really identify with themselves as a unique community within the Internet.  So we could do lots of things with that from the perspective that  that that is an identifiable community and Xbox itself means very specific things to that community.
Windows is a different animal.  Windows is a generic thing that runs anywhere, like it or not.  And so for us, figuring out how to communicate the unique value proposition to end users of whatever the domain is, that we're operating is  is just a critical thing.  And I think for the entire gTLD ecosystem to be successful, those of us apply for domains, we need to be careful how we apply for them and they are launched.  <!0> will be Janis' descending spiral which we don't want to see.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Yeah, Jim?
>> PARTICIPANT: Yeah, thank you, Jim render grant.  Akram, I I will ask the question but I think the answer is beneficial for those in the audience and the record.  We heard about round two coming.  Round one being advertising for the future rounds.  Can you give an estimate of when we might see a round two opening.
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: Tomorrow?
>> PARTICIPANT: Monday.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Yes, on Monday.  We are still here tomorrow.
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: So let's first agree that it's not my decision when there is a second round.  It's actually the community's decision, but there are a few things that we need to do, I think that we need to wait for the first few delegations to be in 9 route for about a year to do some assessment and understand how successful they were, and based on, that I think we can start talking about the second round.  So I don't foresee something to happen before a couple of years from now.  But I think there will be some pressure, once some of the corporate brands for example see that their competitors have a route and if it actually starts coming out, we will get pressure from the other corporates that didn't participate in the program to open up for second round.
Also, I think the other pressure comes from IDNs.  If the demand is, there then we will start seeing some pressure there.  I think that 9 generics were  you know, also the names are already applied for.  So I don't know how many generics we need in the Latin script, but we will see that happen the next few months.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: And I was just about to ask you, hayer because I suspect you  I know that the GAC has a view on some stuff that needs to happen before we go to round two. 
>> HEATHER DRYDEN: Thank you, yes.  So Akram mentioned some of the areas of interest that may be out there, that will seek a second round, but to come back to our earlier discussion, governments and the GAC have been very clear that they would like to see increased uptake, and for them to take advantage.  And we also need to look at what worked well in this program and maybe what worked less well.  And so there needs to be at least enough time to learn those lessons and maybe recalibrate some of the rules and or the approaches that are were undertaken this time around, in order to enable things to perhaps go a bit more smoothly or at least to get those kinds of results that we're looking for.  I think it would be beneficial to have clear objectives advance  in advance as a community at ICANN.  I'm not entirely convinced that with the round that we're now in process with, that there really was a solid, shared understanding about what would be the objectives for the program, allowing us to determine what would make it successful.  And so, of course, if you are going to undertake a round again, you are going to want to see communities of users.
You do want to see encouragement of language groups, social groups, cultural groups, these kinds of things.  That's not to say that there's any difficulty with coming at it from a business perspective, and frankly, the brand top level domains are probably the most straightforward kind of application that there is.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: You mean at like Amazon?
>> HEATHER DRYDEN: No comment.  But if you look at trademark protections and some of the issues that were associated with the generics, generally speaking, you can  I think probably avoid many of those when it comes to considering a brand application.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: I will ask Tijani to comment in a second.  We are assuming that the brand applications will create pressure for other brands.  I mean, it's entirely possible that this whole thing may actually turn out to not do that at all and, in fact, brands may be seeing in a year's time, not entirely sure why I bothered.  It's hard to know.  Very hard to know.  Tijani.
>> TIJANI BNE JEMAA: Thank you, Chris.  Following on what was said about a second round, inside 9 group, we were thinking about litigations of the actual situation, regarding the developing economies and the poor communities in the first round.  And one of the possible solutions was that we proposed to organise a dedicated round for the developing economies and the poor communities with certain limitations.  So that 9 situation would be improved.
I want to say that the most interesting strengths are already took during this first round.  And this is big for all the developing economies so they can perhaps have better chance to have their TLDs, perhaps a dedicated round would be good.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Does anybody else on the panel want to comment?  Paul?
>> PAUL MITCHELL:  So I think the exHuberrance of the gTLD program and wanting to go to the second round is on the one hand really great, because it's report of pushing the innovation button and I think that's always important.
On the other hand, I think when I  when I think about the engineering issues and the scaling issues I think we would be counseling something like more four plus years before going to another round.  That is long enough that we would have gone through as an industry a couple iterations of new browsers, having taken into account to solve these problems that, we will have stabilized the impact on the all the delegations that have happened and we will have a substantive period of stability in the new environment, substantive means a couple of years which is really not all that long, but it is fairly long in Internet time, where we could as a community judge the technical issues because there will be some.  We though that and judge the economic issues and judge the user outtake and then be able to make adaptations to the program for the second round.  So I would just offer that  I think we might as a community be wise to think about it that way.
The exception, I think to that would be to do something to stimulate a little bit of IDN in line with the comments on either side.  I mean, we were actually surprised to see the relatively low number of IDN applications in the overall pool.
You know, we were thinking, perhaps naively that that would have been a large batch that  because finally it's opened up and I think that's an area where you could stimulate just a round for IDNs and figure out how to build the pool that way.  But I guess we will see what happens.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: I guess we will.
Anything else got anything they would like to comment on or ask about the new gTLD program?
Otherwise, I will go to the final round of comments from the panel, if there are any and then we can grab a beer for those who drink beer.
Olivier, I knew you couldn't resist! 
>> PARTICIPANT: Thanks very much, Olivier campaign ALAC chair.  I was just going to add one more comment, which is that ICANN is currently putting together a set of metrics in order to monitor the development and the rollout of those new gTLDs and to find out whether they are going to effectively make the Internet space better or whether they are going to serve the public interest and so this is a very interesting and very important program that is being rolled out.
And I guess that  some of the answers as to when the next round will take place and how successful is this program going to be, these questions are going to be probably partially answered at least by this continued monitoring that ICANN will be bringing together, not that it's  it's particularly important to recognize that.  Thank you.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thanks, Olivier.  It's interesting that we have heard this afternoon  I wouldn't go so far as to say consensus, but we have heard a level of understanding.
It may well be that a round two wouldn't necessarily moon a big round two.  It may be what can we put into round two that can be done, such as more IDNs and TLDs.
Does anyone want to have a last crack at the comment?  Akram? 
>> AKRAM ATALLAH: So I just want to say that there is the fact that the Internet is global and when we talk about scripts and IDNs at local, so that might be the reason why we didn't see the uptick that everybody expects because if I'm in an organisation, I want to be on the Internet, then I will not be able to use a script that's not global.
So until these economies actually become locally much stronger, it might be hard to stimulate IDN demand.  Having said that, I think that this launch is going to be the measure of the demand.  How much demand there is for IDNs?  They are going to know about the program.  They are going to know about the ability of getting IDNs and I think that's going to help us measure the next steps, looking forward to all the innovation on that space. 
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Janis, you had your hand up to comment.
>> JANIS KARKLINS: Local or not so local, if you take spread, for instance, of people speaking Chinese in the world, I think it's fairly global.  The thing is some people, Chinese speaking Internet users there is no really big demand for IDN.  It's actually clear and evident that IDNs is a way of expression of the national identity or the ethical identity and there is a very strong emotional affiliation to that.  And therefore, as soon as user experience will be satisfactory, I suspect that that will drive a lot of  or create a lot of hype around the IDN.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Heather?
>> HEATHER DRYDEN: Thank you.  I just wanted to conclude with an observation that we talked a bit about, the GAC and the importance of these mechanisms.  So there was really an element of it being experimental for the GAC to issue early warnings like this and to be able to issue consensus objections and to be so persuasive in terms of the applications that were made, and  and this really meant that governments were part of the process in a way that they have not been before and, you know, we had a vast array of issues arise because of the various applications and the various kinds of applications that have been made.  And this has meant that the GAC has had to deal with all of kinds of issues that dealt with in other organisations, expert organisations.  So that's been this test and has really drawn out what is most interesting about the committee within ICANN, within the ICANN model, and that is the interaction of these entities that are sovereign entities, sending representatives to a committee that is part of the ICANN framework, and how such a political process is Interacing with a decision making process that needs to have some degree of predictability and following some rules and result in decision making at the end that is sound and I think it's fascinating so far.  I don't think we are quite there yet.  We do have some decisions still pending and issues remaining in GAC on that.
But, you know, it's already clear to me that  that that tension is really an interesting one to look at about how these things work.
And, in fact, there isn't always shared expectations about what that interaction looks like between governments and the other communities at ICANN, whether it's business, whether it's the board or civil society.  So I just wanted to point that out because I think it's really of broad significance what's been going on.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thanks, Heather.  Tijani.
>> TIJANI BNE JEMAA: Thank you.  I would like to add something about the IDN and why the demand on the IDN is not so big.
I think that for the business, for people interested in the business, they  they want to remain in the strengths because they want to sell their goods everywhere in the world, even if there is half the world speaking Chinese, Chinese businessmen wants to tell them their goods not only for Chinese but for the other people, and since the English is better understood than Chinese for the whole world, they will remain with the ASCII.  Or IDN ccTLD, now it is almost not used.  People are not asking for it.  Only people interested in culture and linguistic issues, they ask for Arabic.tn.
The business community are not interested in it.  Thank you. 
>> PAUL MITCHELL:  So I don't particularly consider myself old.  But when I was going to school, none of this stuff existed and so here we are.  And we are on top of a global platform that is, you know, responsible for huge economic uplift around the world, and if we do our jobs correctly, that that uplift really moves into developing countries and helps them.  It helps the developed countries and it brings us all closer together.
One of the challenges that we face, when we do something as innovative and disruptive as this new program is we risk destabilizing things that are now fundamental requirements of our developed societies. 
I think it is a testament to the system as a whole that this process which has gone on for seven or eight years trying to figure it out, with lots of commentary with various political and emotional tonality, depending on where you are on various issues.  It's a testament to the system that we've got this far and things are working reasonably well.
I think just moving forward, the challenges for us all to make sure that as we really pull the lever, that we make sure that this round is working and working well and that we do our part collectively to make sure that that happens.  And keep the relationships with all the stakeholders, the GAC, especially, to make sure that we can continue to evolve this thing as successfully as it has over the past few years.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: Thank you.  And on that note, I think we'll wind it up.  So would you all please join me in thanking the panel.
(Applause).
And thank you all for coming. 
>> An the moderator.
>> CHRIS DISSPAIN: And the moderator.
(End of session 5:50 p.m.)

