WS 127 MS SELECTION PROCESSES: ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY 




                           EIGHTH INTERNET GOVERNANCE FORUM
 
                                        BALI
 
                  BUILDING BRIDGES - ENHANCING MULTI-STAKEHOLDER
 
                 COOPERATION FOR GROWTH AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
 
                                  October 23, 2013
 
                                     2:30 p.m.
 
                                     WS 127 MS
 
               SELECTION PROCESSES:  ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY
 
 

The following is the output of the real-time captioning taken during the Eigth Meeting of the IGF, in Bali, Indonesia. Although it is largely accurate, in some cases it may be incomplete or inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to understanding the proceedings at the session, but should not be treated as an authoritative record.

 
               
 
               (This text is being provided in a rough draft format.
               Communication Access Realtime Translation (CART) is provided
               in order to facilitate communication accessibility and may
               not be a totally verbatim record of the proceedings.
                  No. 127, MS Selection Processes:  Accountability and
               Transparency, No. 127, MS Selection Processes:
               Accountability and Transparency.
                  -- remotely, we know that you are sacrificing your sleep
               time wherever you are, whichever time zone and we would
               encourage you to participate remotely and all contributions
               welcome.  Just a quick note.  We will be drafting an
               outcomes document and we've got a strict rule.  If you want
               to be part of the drafting team, please give your card,
               leave your card on the table where the projector is before
               leaving the meeting and we will be in touch with you.  But
               before that, this workshop is on multi-stakeholder selection
               processes, accountability and transparency.  And we're very
               pleased that we have an excellent panel of experts in is
               respective institutions and communities.  And one of the
               things that we've -- one of the things we've been seeing
               throughout this Internet governance forum is the concept of
               enhanced cooperation and how that -- what that means, what
               it looks like, how does it feel.  And a critical component
               of enhanced cooperation is in the context of the selection
               processes that take place that allow for the voices of the
               different stakeholders and critical stakeholders from
               different constituencies as they engage in the governance
               processes and I thought and I think very quickly I would
               just like to also set the parameters of this discussion
               that's going to ensue.  The cooperation -- the context in
               which we will be engaging in discussions today is within the
               broader global governance mechanisms so we're not talking
               about internal processes within Internet organizations such
               as internal processes within ICANN or internal processes
               within eye sock and that sort of thing.  What we're talking
               about is collaborative, collaborative cross constituencies
               processes where selection processes are made towards, to its
               committees and that sort of thing.  Things like the UNESDA,
               things like the MEG.  So with that, I'd like to invite
               Constance Bommelear from the technical community would will
               be sharing her thoughts.  Constance.
                  >> CONSTANCE BOMMELEAR:  Thank you very much.  So I'll
               just start by giving some information on the context of the
               discussion here.  Since WSIS's on sock has been asked to
               serve as a focal point for various nomination processes and
               this has been used for the renewal of the MAG, for instance
               or several working groups of the UN STD, the commission on
               designs technical and development.  To facilitate
               discussions around Internet Governance in our various
               nomination processes we have panelist.  It's called the

 
 
 
 
 
               Internet collaboration panelist and we also organize monthly
               calls to exchange in a very informal way on our various
               activities, insights, thoughts.  And when useful we use this
               group and this platform to identify representatives of the
               technical community for these various purposes, finding
               individuals, good experts to feed the MAG or various working
               groups.  You said we wouldn't go into a lot of details on
               these nomination processes, but I think it's still worth,
               you know, very briefly saying that in the example of this
               STD working group on enhanced cooperation, for instance, in
               a very simple way we share the call, the opportunity with
               our mailing list, with our communities.  We ask for names
               with relevant information, biographies, et cetera and then
               we have a call, several calls, if necessary, we come up with
               a short list and then final names are suggested, put forward
               to the relevant intergovernmental bodies because usually
               it's for the IGF or for the CSTD, acknowledging that the
               decision of course is taken by those relevant -- those
               relevant bodies.  Before going further, I would just like to
               shed some light on what for me seems to be a Paradox.  The
               technical community by nature is informal.  When the
               technical community gathers within the ITF, it is an
               informal group of individuals and organizations who work on
               a specific task at a specific moment and the Paradox is that
               as all these multi-stakeholder processes have developed,
               when we are asked to designate representatives of our
               community to feed these processes, we are asked to define
               very precisely who we are to fit through the door and that
               is really a Paradox on which we have to work, of course.
                  So I think it's fair to say that there is some gray
               zones.  Many individuals who are recognized as being part of
               one community may have connections, interests in other
               communities.  And I guess this is where the notion of
               community has all its importance.  Our various groups of
               stakeholders are united around a set of values, interests,
               specific working items and again I think this notion of
               community being recognized as being a part of one group
               shows that there is a societal aspect to -- to the evolution
               and the definition of these various groups.  In short, there
               is no legal definition of our various groups.  Furthermore,
               I would also note that these various groups that have
               evolved and developed since WSIS, none of them can really
               intend to represent the entire groups.  They come from.  The
               Internet collaboration group, for instance, could not
               intend, could not affirm that it represents the entire
               technical community.  I don't think not from the IGC, but I
               don't think the IGC, for instance, could affirm that it
               represents the entire Civil Society here.  And this is why
               it's also very important to recognize that no one has the
               monopoly of feeding multi-stakeholder processes and it's

 
 
 
 
 
               probably very good to have competition between various
               groups.  The Internet collaboration group i consider it as a
               core group, an informal core group.  If individuals or
               organizations feel that they are part of the technical
               community and wish to put their name forward directly by
               contacting the UN or various intergovernmental bodies, I
               think that should be possible.  The Internet collaboration
               group in my view is there to facilitate discussion among
               specific group, but it certainly cannot to represent the
               entire technical community.  And I will conclude before
               George completes, that the Internet collaboration group
               really is committed to furthering, amplifying
               multi-stakeholder processes.  Many of our organizations,
               many of the individuals that are part of our community
               support in their own capacity or through the organizations
               they work for fellowships, ambassadorships, the IGF
               ambassadorship that is run by the Internet Society is one
               example.  I know there are many other organizations and
               individuals who help the development of such processes in
               our community, but also in other communities.  So I'll stop
               there and see if George would like to add to what I've said
               and I'm sure I've forgotten many, many details.
                  >> GEORGE SADOWSKY:  No, you haven't.  It's a very good
               summary of where we are and what we do.  I'd like the add
               some thoughts, some of them are very similar to what
               Constance has said.  There are maybe some new things
               involved.  First of all I'd like to say that even though I'm
               facilitated with ICANN, I'm speaking in my individual
               capacity here so the first thing to ask, that I ask is what
               is the Internet technical community and the community is a
               slippery word, it can mean many different things to many
               people.  But starting, let's say that everybody who is
               involved in the direct administration, development,
               operation, care and feeding of the Internet is in that
               community.  And that's a big community.  My -- off the cuff
               estimate is about two million people.  Cot be less.  Cot be
               more.  Depends on what, how thank you estimate.  How many of
               those are non -- aware of Internet Governance issues is a
               much smaller group.  Maybe it's 10,000 and maybe it's more
               after the NSA and related disclosures.  How will many of
               those are interested in really understanding and staying
               informed in some detail, maybe it's 200.  Maybe more.  And
               how many of those want to participate really actively in
               Internet Governance?  Well, 50, maybe more.  I don't know.
               But this is what we see when we talk about Internet
               Governance.  The technical community is self identifying.
               You can't just join.  You join by establishing a track
               record, a technical track record in the community.  Which is
               different from, some other communities where you join
               because you have an interest and you want to learn and

 
 
 
 
 
               you're recognized as a member immediately.  The community is
               open.  But the recognition of membership in it is based on
               accomplishments.
                  So next question I asked was, what should the goals of
               the technical community be with respect to Internet
               Governance decisions and discussions and I think it's to
               provide useful and accurate technical advice regarding
               possible technical mechanisms that affect Internet
               Governance and to inform the larger community, the multi
               sectorial or the multi-stakeholder community regarding the
               implications of actual or proposed decisions or by other
               actors or by the group as a whole.  I think it's important
               to recognize the difference as Constance has said between
               the interests of people in the technical community and what
               we think the technical community should be giving to these
               discussions.
                  People in the community have different interests.  I take
               myself as an example.  I've been an independent
               entrepreneur.  I've run governments.  But I consider myself
               technical.  The -- if I represent the technical community, I
               will be informed of, in my experience by all these things
               but I will, I think I should keep the advice to the
               technical advice and how it affects the discussions.  And I
               think that's a difference that sometimes gets blurred when
               we think about what the representatives of the various
               communities should be providing.  Now, not everybody is in
               agreement with that definition and you'd like to discuss it
               further, workshop 210t role of the technical community in
               Internet Governance is going to drill down to this topic a
               little bit more.  It's Thursday at 2:30 p.m.
                  So how do we select people to represent the community in
               multi-stakeholder discussions in -- outside of the technical
               community?  I start with the premise that each stakeholder
               group has its own culture, it's own processes, private
               sectors certainly operates differently than government and
               they operate differently from Civil Society.  And these, the
               cultures reflect the history and the particular substance in
               our case technical substance underlying the group.  And I
               think one of the ways we can cooperate in the regard is we
               respect the policies and guidelines of the other groups
               because they know what they're doing in those sectors and we
               expect our those processes and our guidelines to be
               respected in the same way by the other groups so there will
               be differences and there should be differences because we're
               not all coming from the same place and we don't all have --
               we don't have 100 percent shared experiences or goals.
                  The Internet technical sector has some very specific
               cultural characteristics.  It's an open community.  It
               regards technical excellence as primary in terms of what it
               does and how it uses its skills.  The Internet was born in a

 
 
 
 
 
               research environment and so research and teaching --
               research and learning, sharing and collaboration, the
               creation of things that work, software, hardware, processes,
               is -- are very important values in our culture.  They're
               embodied in the ITF culture which is Ameritrocracy.  It's
               run by people who understand excellence and recognize it and
               at the same time recognize lack of excellence.  They are
               concerned with operational proof of what they do, running
               code.  And they have a method of making decisions which is
               not shared, I think, in many places, rough consensus.  And
               rough consensus is an interesting concept because you sort
               of intuitively know what it means, but it is capable of
               further study and there's a paper a recent Internet draft by
               Pete Resnik which is fairly long and it gives a nuanced and
               insightful analysis of how the ITF regards rough con sense
               us and I think it's worth reading if there's any interest in
               mowing more about that.
                  In terms of selection principles, our concern is that the
               person we choose has the appropriate knowledge, either
               technical excellence or strongly connected to that community
               that has technical excellence that supports that issue.  And
               the principles that qualify our representatives are
               independence, belonging to the community, transparency,
               participation, technical relevance and ability to
               collaborate and those are principles that we can go into
               more later if you like.  But those are the ones that we see
               as being really important for judging who we would like to
               have represent us in multi-stakeholder forum.  The choices
               discussed and made by a small, self selected group of the
               technical community, as Constance said, we don't claim to
               represent the technical community, but we also know that the
               technical community, those who care and even those who don't
               know what we're doing and can on the basis of their, of
               their background, they can -- they can come and be a part of
               us if they, if they don't like the way we're doing things,
               they will join us and they will tell us.  The group that is
               choosing is open.  It's based on expertise and interest and
               understanding of the issue.  The rough consensus principle
               is used to come to a decision.  Finally I'd like to say that
               the group and process are presently coordinated by ISOP by
               mutual consent.  It's not dependent on reports to ISOP.  We
               had hoped to have a short paper which describes these
               processes and guidelines in somewhat more detail and
               somewhat more Chris per manner, we're not quite ready for
               that yet.  We just weren't able to pull it together.  But we
               are working on it and even when it is published, we
               understand and state that the process and the criteria are
               going to evolve and they're going to evolve in response to
               our thinking about things and in response to the evolving
               situation in Internet Governance and the evolving needs of

 
 
 
 
 
               the multi-stakeholder gathering to which we will be
               providing representatives.  Thank you.
                  >>  :  Before we hear from Civil Society, a quick
               synthesis of what both Constance and George are sort of
               addressed, what they raised was we're hearing that different
               stakeholder groups have different mechanisms for selection.
               The other thing was definitions in terms of defining
               communities.  The other thing that we're hearing is
               criteria, the issue of criteria of selection, for selection.
               So with that, we're going to hear from Civil Society and
               we'll have Anriette Esterhuysen address us.
                  >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Does someone know how to turn
               the air conditioning down, please, if possible?  Because I
               think I'm getting frostbite on my ears.  Might be back here
               as well.  Anyway, thanks.  I was preparing to speak
               specifically about the CTSD process.  I think that was the
               plan, was it not?  Okay for me to do that but I will make a
               few general remarks.
                  I think selection process in Civil Society is really
               complicated.  I think it's always quite complicated but I
               think in Civil Society particularly in the IG sector because
               unlike with business and with the technical community, even
               though they are diverse within themselves, within the IGF
               context, we've evolved in a way where they've had appointed
               institutions that have been playing a facilitated role, eye
               sock and ICC basis I'm sure not everyone in the technical
               community considers that legitimate but there's a general
               consensus within those communities that those are legitimate
               institutions a than that they do a job that most people
               respect.  In Civil Society we've never had that degree of
               organization and we have spaces where we have discussions
               such as the Internet Governance Caucus but they've never
               been established as structures that can represent us.  So
               and I think, so that's the one reason.  And then I think
               also the goals, while Civil Society goals I think are
               generally quite common, and the difference solutions that
               people in Civil Society propose or believe in very
               enormously and I'll just mention one example and that is
               regulate the Internet or not?  So I think everyone in Civil
               Society will say we believe in it -- in an intent for common
               good, but some people will have a very libertarian, no
               regulation solution to an achieve that goal.  And others
               believe there needs to be more laws, regulation, checks and
               balances and so on and in between is the spectrum so it's
               actually very difficult and I think the other complexity for
               Civil Society is resources.  There's -- I know that all IGF
               participants and -- struggle to have the resources to
               participate.  But I think with business and technical
               community is, there's probably more of an overlap between
               people that have the interest and the capacity to

 
 
 
 
 
               participate in these processes and institutions that
               might -- or it might be in the line of their work.  So I
               don't want to make generalizations because I know from the
               African sector that everyone in Africa, small businesses a
               well and many people in the technical community does have
               the resources and then I think the issue of power.  I think
               that within our IGF and our Internet Governance universe, I
               think that the -- community and business has been more
               effective in establishing their power and influence in a
               consistent way and you might see it very differently.  But
               from my perspective for someone in Civil Society, I think
               Civil Society has not been as organized, not as coherent,
               not as consistent.  And therefore, our power and influence
               has tended to wax and wane.  It comes and goes and it
               depends on the issue of the moment and the event.  And what
               this does is it creates a certain sense of or a certain
               degree of tension among Civil Society and this tension plays
               itself out often when there's a selection process.  And the
               issue of, you know, the other issues that you have the Civil
               Society's spaces are made up of a mix of individuals,
               academics, organizations, and we generally work in a very
               open and inclusive way but when it comes to selection
               processes that's more complex.  In the caucus, the IGC, very
               transparent procedures have been developed for selecting
               representatives of the IGC caucus, there's a Non Com process
               but many people in Civil Society I would say most would not
               feel that the IGC caucus is not the representative body for
               all of Civil Society so even though IGC has made all this
               progress in establishing transparent and effectively,
               accountable procedures with this -- there's even a, not a
               grievance.  It's not a, an appeals, appeals procedure,
               there's an appeals team so the procedures are really sound.
               But it doesn't represent all of Civil Society.  So to get to
               the CSTD.  I was asked by the chair of the CSTD to
               facilitate the selection process of the representatives to
               the working -- corporation and because of all the reasons
               I've just mentioned, I felt that I needed to establish a
               fresh process.  I felt I needed to take responsibility for
               it.  I didn't feel it would be appropriate for me to
               delegate it to the IGC or to anyone else for that matter.
               Because I thought that would actually make it even more
               difficult.  And the, you know, the methodology I used was
               essentially very similar to any other selection process or a
               hiring process.  I convened a selection group.  Draw on
               individuals that have been active in sort of society and the
               Internet Governance context that was regional representative
               so I had somebody from each of the main regions that we all
               work in, continents.  Then this group, I had to brief in a
               very short space of time and get their -- we add Africa,
               Asia, North America, Latin America and Europe and then to

 
 
 
 
 
               complement that group I invited two past IGC coordinators
               and the reason I felt this was necessary was not just
               because of the IGC but the IGC had already done it's own
               selection process by that time for the CSTD working group
               and I felt that though show some respect for that selection
               process without just adopting it wholesale, it would be
               appropriate to have, two IGC coordinators so just to show
               respect for that structure so this is I guess just balancing
               interests and trying to build more ownership of the process.
                  And then to avoid conflict of interest, I did not include
               anyone from APC in the selection.  APC is quite a large
               network so this are a lot of ABC people in this community
               but I did not feel it would be appropriate to include anyone
               from ABC.  So then it was a question of inviting other
               nations and criteria.  I had to develop the specific device
               for dealing with endorsed nominees, people that had been,
               some people would send in a nomination with 50 endorsements
               or 50 other people having endorsed them.  Some would just
               send nomination of one person and having discussed that as
               well with the selection group and other, we noted, if anyone
               had been endorsed, but we felt seeing as it was not a
               criteria, it would not be appropriate to give desirable
               weighting to people who had received endorsements.  And then
               the criteria were experience and expertise in public
               interest or policy processes.  Experience and expertise in
               enhanced coop e in relation to WSIS and.  Ability and
               commitment to put in the work and travel.  Ability to work
               collaboratively and confidently in multi-stakeholder
               processes that involve both consensus building and dealing
               with conflicting interests.  And then we allowed for
               regional and gender balance.  So the process was quite
               complicated.  The core selection committee had to work quite
               hard.  Nima was there.  She knows.  And we had several
               scoring processes.  We had a short list.  And then out of
               the short list we scored again.  All in all, I feel happy
               with that particular process and I think it has, some people
               question the legitimacy and I think even though it was a
               very transparent process, there were still people that
               questioned the legitimacy, but I felt that I had and with
               the help of the selection committee a process that I could
               respond to.  So there was -- was pretty transparent because
               I think it is okay for people to question these processes.
               I think but it was legitimate to question them and I
               prepared and anticipated that it might be.  I think in just
               in retrospect, actually I'll come back to that because
               having reflected on that process, there is some additional
               criteria that I think should be applied and also criteria on
               assessing whether people that have been selected, even, you
               know, through a process like this are actually deliberate,
               are they doing the work?  And I would like us to have

 
 
 
 
 
               particularly with processes like the MAG to have mechanism
               where we can remove people if they don't deliver or
               participate before the next round of rotation comes up.  But
               I'll come back to that later.  That was just the story of
               the CSTD process.
                  >>  :  Thank you, and just before I give this over to
               Norbert, we just listened to a practical selection process
               and the evolution of that particular selection process
               within Civil Society, Norbert Bollow.
                  >> NORBERT BALLOW:  No, okay.  Quickly, to introduce
               myself, I'm together with Sellen Yaiten who is moderating
               this meeting, the other coordinator of Internet Governance
               Caucus and sometimes I joke that I'm wearing the coordinator
               hat when I speak officially, but now I just speak in my
               personal capacity just giving a perspective.  Personally, I
               like the -- and especially when we want to look forward and
               find solutions that may have some sustainability, I like to
               think about the reason for things.  Now, it's easy for me to
               see why the technical community has a lot of credibility in
               this space.  Essentially, they build it.  They know it.
               They can tell us how it works.  It's easy to see where the
               business community has credibility or at least why I would
               assign credibility.  This is something that everybody that's
               more or less personally because they are in the position
               through having a significant customer base to be part of the
               solution.  When we have problems and we have lots of them in
               Internet Governance, we need to have the -- world that can
               actually make change happen.  Different of course are
               governments but they also have power to make change happen.
               So now, here come we, Civil Society people and we claim that
               we should be totally respected.  But why?  What is the basis
               for our claim?  And I think the real basis for this claim is
               that we can claim independence.  Power is something
               valuable.  But it also comes with its interests and in order
               to be respected, I would say we as Civil Society need to
               maintain independence from such power in order to be
               respected as Civil Society.  So this is in a way a core
               criterion if we want to be representing Civil Society we
               should make sure that we are actually credibly able to
               represent the people who we claim to represent and not -- we
               are not be too influenced by some kind of monetary or
               political interest that we might care about.  While the
               easiest way to solve this problem is simply for everybody to
               come in and represent their own interests, that is totally
               unproblematic in a way except that not everybody takes the
               time to come here, not everybody's able to.  And except that
               in some context like this IGC working group, they're simply
               not accepting everybody to come so there must be a selection
               process with credibility that figures out the small number
               of people.  We only have a small number of representatives

 
 
 
 
 
               in Civil Society who will represent Civil Society.  So
               somehow this would be my first prince approximately in this
               selection process, it must ensure that these people who get
               selected are actually independent of political and business
               power.  The second principle that I was, would propose
               specifically for Civil Society has to do with what was
               already mentioned several times.  There is not a single
               entity that can claim to be totally representative.  What is
               the point of Internet Governance Caucus selecting some
               people from just the relatively small part of Civil Society
               that is organized in the caucus and everybody else will feel
               unrepresented?  So I would propose this fundamental idea of
               a non -- commission, nomination commission is good but if
               the goal is to represent Civil Society as a whole, it must
               not be a commission of this Internet Governance Caucus with
               you I would propose it must be joined Non Com where all
               Civil Society people are equally able to put their names
               forward to become part of the Non Com.  I quickly summarize
               how this works.  The nomination commission process, the Non
               Com process, we get, we ask many people to volunteer to be
               part of this commission and they -- the actual members of
               the commission are then randomly selected.  It works
               surprisingly well.  These random people, they then discuss
               criteria.  They make a call for interests.  And people who
               want to be selected, they put forward their names, the
               reasons why they would consider themselves to be viable
               candidates and then the nomination commission, they decide
               and in the end they decide.  They discuss, they decide,
               possibly by voting.
                  The big difference that I would propose, it must be a
               joint thing.  It must not be a thing of the caucus or some
               other entity but this will be something in my opinion that
               we need to organize in Civil Society including the major
               groups which is ABC, now that's another rising star called
               best fits and there are many, many, many Civil Society
               people, the vast majority is not part of any of these
               networks so a joint nomination commission would really need
               to reach out to this huge community and then of course to
               make this credible to make trustworthy, we must have
               accountability, we must have transparency but I think I stop
               here for now and in the discussion then perhaps we can find
               more joint principles, how to actually make this
               accountability and transparency work.  Thank you.
                  >>  :  Thank you, Norbert.  At this point, I'd just like
               to mention that there is actually a working document that's
               already been passed around.  It's probably hosted on a
               website already.  I'm not sure, but we'll check after this.
               And I just wanted to point out that there will be a drafting
               process and members of those who are here in the room are
               invited to be part of that process where you can actually

 
 
 
 
 
               give your feedback where we encourage the solicitation of a
               diverse perspectives on the issue, on the issues that are
               raised.  And yes, this invitation is also open to those who
               are remotely participated participating.  I'd just like to
               very quickly synthesize the words of Civil Society here on
               this panel just to tease out two critical points.
                  One was whether there's need for aggregating the voice of
               Civil Society pertaining to a potential Non Com with these,
               in terms of the selection processes, increasing and
               enhancing accountability and transparency.  Again we don't
               know how that's going to look.  These are just what we're
               hearing from Norbert.  And also pertaining to the issue of
               criteria and we're hearing this from the technical
               community.  We're hearing it again from within Civil
               Society, the issue of criteria and the diverse conflicting
               permits even within that category.  And with that, I would
               just like to welcome Ayesha Hassan who will be addressing us
               from the business focal point in terms of their selection
               processes and multi-stakeholder selection processes in terms
               of accountability and transparency.  Ayesha.
                  >> AYESHA HASSAN:  Thank you very much, and thank you to
               the other panelists because I think there is really some
               interesting common areas that are coming out both in terms
               of criteria and approaches as well as challenges.  Yes, so
               Ayesha Hassan on behalf of ICC basis.  Chamber of commerce
               back during the summit was asked to be the sole focal point
               for business so during the summit we set up an umbrella
               called the coordinating committee.  CCDI, and that was the
               sole accreditation mechanism for any business that wanted to
               be a part of the summit preparations and be at the summit.
               At the end of the summit when these various processes were
               established, IGF, the CSTDs, follow up, et cetera, we
               launched the basis initiative as a call -- as our members
               and business that was involved in the summit wanted to have
               a coordinating representational advocacy platform for
               business to help them organize themselves to bring the
               expertise of business into the IGF and other processes.
                  So basis is basically that.  It's a platform that
               provides those services but also serves as the focal point
               vis-a-vis the multi-stakeholder advisory group, the various
               CSTD working groups, et cetera, to provide business experts
               for those, those groups.  Over the process -- over the
               packet years, we've evolved our process for selection.  And
               I wanted to under score that though we as ICC basis do put
               forward proposes for these various groups, the MAG, et
               cetera, there are examples where business representatives
               have been appointed through other channels.  But because of
               the credibility that has been established, the fact that ICC
               bases its member but also our networks because the
               membership includes various other business associations

 
 
 
 
 
               WISA, ACECTA, et cetera, and those associations have
               networks that are regional or sector specific so we start
               our process to select, identify potential members, we're
               going out to our national committees in 120 countries, to
               the members of our digital economy commission which is over
               300 members, to the networks of the various associations
               that are facilitated with ICC basis and asking them as a
               first step to send in names, identify people and once we
               have the names, we go through a similar process that has
               been described by the others.  We put out the whole list of
               names with short buy os to our basis membership.  They
               prioritize those names and tell us if we need to fill eight
               either seats they prioritize the eight, whatever that number
               might be.  We take a couple rounds that includes e-mail
               input as well as teleconferences to discuss the group that
               has been put forward.  My colleague Constance Vise is in the
               room as well, she helps to compile the numbers and once
               we've got tone a solid base, that is the list take goes in.
                  In terms of criteria, I mean I would say qualities.  What
               we're looking for are many things that I've heard from the
               other panelists as well.  First off, we're looking for
               somebody who has experience with the processes and expertise
               that they're going to bring a sector specific or geographic
               specific perspective, business perspective.  We also are
               looking for people who are actively engaged.  This is --
               these processes are complicated and it makes it easier if
               somebody has some exposure to them already.  Somebody who is
               actively willing to collaborate, a willingness to work with
               others across stakeholder groups, and as Anriette pointed
               out over the years it's become more and more really a major
               criteria for us that people can commit to the travel, to the
               work, are willing to also keep the business community
               updated on what's going on as they serve as our
               representatives.  And we've also made attempts to -- to the
               extent possible have diversity of geographic and gender
               diversity.  And I would also just comment that the
               geographic diversity issue, we -- we are challenged to
               ensure that developing country business participants have
               the are resources and support to perform their duties in
               these working groups and it affects them as much as anyone
               else from other stakeholder groups.
                  I would also say that as George has said, the different
               stakeholder groups have different cultures.  From a business
               perspective, there is a desire for there to be an easy
               effective, efficient way for these kind of selection
               processes to happen and people have felt comfortable with
               ICC basis.  That again doesn't mean that there aren't
               business people out there who participate in these processes
               who are not part of this group.  But we do provide an useful
               focal point for business.  So with that, I'll stop and I

 
 
 
 
 
               hope that that describes the process.  I'm happy to take
               questions.  Thanks.
                  >>  :  Thank you Ayesha.  We're going to hear from
               Mr. Virat Bhatia from AT&T India.
                  >> VIRAT BHATIA:  Thank you.  I, I also chair an industry
               association in deli.  The largest industry association in
               India which has about 150 representatives of ICT spaces
               which work under this umbrella body.  And as we see this
               process of stakeholder selection I can sort of come back to
               experiments that we have tried in the last two years.  We
               started off domestically with an India Internet Governance
               conference which is a governance initiative for the first
               time after India had hosted the IGF in 2008.  Usually it
               isn't up to the private sector to sort of get this movement
               going.  But we did.  It was originally planned out to be an
               Internet broadband conference and we extend it to include
               many of the governance agendas, but that also meant
               expanding who are the events and what events and what
               sessions would be arranged so that meant then calling in
               everyone that we knew to participate in that process.  And
               these were both established names and some not so
               established names from various different backgrounds.
               Anybody who tries to put together a coalition of
               multi-stakeholders, let me tell you it's not easy.  It's
               never complete and no one is ever happy.  But for me, it was
               a very rewarding and -- experience for the simple reason
               that we're not coached and trained to deal with
               multi-stakeholder groups in a dialogue that spends
               80 percent of the time on process and 20 percent of the time
               on results.  The business community -- dealing 10 percent on
               process and then gets onto the results.  The business
               community is also inherently trained to very quickly find a
               coalition, find a leader, find common issues and get behind
               it.  They also trained because they advocate that the
               government quickly leave out issues.  This is not what we
               experienced when we put together the selection process for
               the multi-stakeholders.  So in the first instance, it was by
               invitation, we expanded.  But we made sure that there was
               adequate representation from all the stakeholder groups and
               25 percent of them were women.  This was in year 1.  Which
               is to the best -- is normal.  It's not a normal number for
               the developing world, certainly not for India to have that
               level of participation.
                  In the next year, we changed the process and selection
               process was open, quite close to what we have in the ITF
               which is self nomination based on who you represent.  And we
               got 49 people who wanted to serve on the national MAG.
               After 49 who put in their application, to serve on the
               national MAG, everybody was selected.  In the end only 30
               participated actively.  But the MAG, in the second year,

 
 
 
 
 
               unlike the first year, it was slightly business heavy, was
               equally distributed amongst business, Civil Society,
               technical community, media, academia and -- reasonably
               equally divided but what was heartening was that the numbers
               moved to 36 percent for women, from 25 percent of the first
               year.  Now, we've had to hold off that process because the
               government has gone ahead and announced an M AG and -- India
               ITF so it's a competing event which we don't want to do.
               But in my experience based on the first experience we've had
               of selecting this, it was quite clear that these individuals
               who represented -- some of them represented large sections
               of India's academia, some of them were in their personal
               capacity but were in individual experts so it wasn't a hard
               and fast rule.  We were able to get away with sort of
               nominating -- sort of making all nominations self
               nominations but I think as you go forward, criteria will
               have to be drawn.  Now, the government has set up an M AG
               and that's also drop down nomination by the government.  Our
               expectation is they will expand that to further include
               people that are not there.
                  But I think the accountability of such a process which
               is -- initially comes from the results that you delivered.
               So while the first year was a process of calling everybody
               that you knew to come participate and the second one was an
               open nomination, you would be glad to know that while the
               funding came voluntarily 100 percent from the private
               sector, 90 percent of the sessions were organized by the
               Civil Society at the academy and the second year, 95 percent
               of the sessions were organized by the Civil Society and the
               a cad my and 50 percent of the sessions were being led by
               women so the whole -- was quite different in terms of
               accountability and where it came so I just wanted to make
               that distinction between processes of selection and the
               outcomes within, it's unclear to me if we had adopted a
               different process than what we did, but that's just a
               country experience.  I think it's an evolving experience,
               you also sort of pleased to foe that some 400 people
               participated in it which made it quite the largest Internet
               Governance.  We don't call it IGF because it -- IGF would be
               launched by the government in the future.  Make one comment.
               I think that the group that we found least -- on what they
               wanted was actually the Civil Society.  They were least
               structured in terms of what they wanted and how they wanted
               the process to go.  The academicians were very clear what
               they needed, they were ready.  Industry I told you, the
               business, the government, even the youth, when we asked them
               to select the coalition leader, they took about seven
               minutes in a room and said by rotation, six months, this
               person six months, this person and they elected a leader.
               The Civil Society could not pick anybody for a long time and

 
 
 
 
 
               that was a challenge, whatever the reason but I just wanted
               to sort of present that point.  But they've been a huge help
               in structuring the discussion, the debates because they
               really brought in the real issues.  So it is a very positive
               side to this difficult process, but I thought I would just
               mention that.
                  >>  :  Thank you, that was really awesome.  The common
               threads that you would have heard from the different
               panelists and essentially one of the thread is criteria,
               issue of the criteria and under criteria, things we're
               hearing are definitions, legitimacy having a proven record
               in the case of the industry association, convening the IGF
               in India, gender in the case of what Anriette had mentioned
               and also ICC basis in terms of selection of representatives
               of the business constituency, geographical distribution and
               really excellent to hear youth.  And then of course the
               other thread is, in terms of accountability, the three
               things that I heard under accountability.  One is the
               selector who is making the selection.  And here we heard two
               different models.  There's one where there's a sole
               selector.  And under that, we're hearing issues of
               credibility in the case of ICC basis where the community
               trusts that ICC basis is competent and capable of making the
               selection.  On the other hand, you have other models where
               it's the MAG or Non Com or an aggregator that makes the
               selection.  And the third thing that I heard under
               accountability from the panelists is the issue of
               productivity and the capacity to remove them if they're not
               performing in terms of accountability.  So here we're
               hearing two throngs of in terms it not only the selection
               but also productivity and that sort of thing so with that,
               I'm just going to very quickly ask any of the panelists if
               they want to quickly comment to any of the other speakers,
               fellow speakers' comments and then we'll open the floor and
               I'll ask the panelists to keep it brief.
                  >> VIRAT BHATIA:  Just a very short couple of points.
               One was that none of the voluntary funding organizations
               were given any privileges in the running of the MAG or the
               sessions.  They had no session, they had no chairs, they
               were not in the inaugural.  They were not sort of out there.
               The brands were not shining all over the place.  There was
               no such thing.  And many of the issues that were discussed
               in the sessions were actually against the performance or the
               interests as you would call of those who had funded the
               businesses so it was the accountability and the strength of
               the process came from the fact that nobody was told you
               can't do the session or you can't hold the session or you
               can't invite any speaker of your choice to any session that
               you want.  And several of them were paid for.  Because they
               were Civil Society and a cad my had to fly from outside the

 
 
 
 
 
               area so they were funded for the process.  We shouldn't
               forget the importance of funding with ensuring participation
               from those that may not have the funds but may have great
               stuff to say in the conference.
                  >>  :  So we're very clear it's the membership that
               prioritizes not the ICC basis Secretariat.  I just wanted to
               make sure because I didn't want to be misunderstood.  It's
               really the membership that votes quote unquote on who should
               be selected or proposed.  Thank you.  Virat as an example
               he's on the CSTD working group through the process.
                  >> VIRAT BHATIA:  I have no idea how I got the votes but
               I was voted in.
                  >>  :  The correct word that I should have used was
               facilitator, facilitating the process, so I'm going to give
               this to George.
                  >> GEORGE SADOWSKY:  I want to take off on something
               Anriette said.  Some of the criteria that she mentioned,
               ability to travel to stick with things to put the time in
               and so on, I guess we assumed it.  I didn't mention it,
               Constance didn't mention it but we assume that's a
               requirement and maybe we should state it as being important
               because certainly it leads to better results.  But Anriette
               pointed on out, brought up the point if somebody's not
               performing, you ought to be able to replace them.  And that
               relates to the performance issue, if -- and it's very
               difficult to make judgments in some caves about how your
               representatives are performing on external bodies.
               Sometimes it's easier.  And I think that she raised a very
               good point.  There is, there's another point and that is
               that we list these decederata, but there are times when they
               conflict and you can't get one without getting less than the
               other and in particular in the technical community, it's
               conceivable and probably does happen that relevant
               experience, that is, the technical experience and
               independence may clash because often the people who know the
               most about a subject are the people who have been working in
               the field intensively and therefore they may not be
               independent.  They may be working for a firm that might
               stand to benefit from their involvement.  Now, the typical
               way around this is to let sun light in that they Claire,
               they declare their conflicts and everybody knows what their
               conflicts are and they're trusted as an individual, then
               it's likely that the lack of independent is not going to be
               nearly so much of an issue and can be tolerated in some
               cases.  Thank you.
                  >>  :  I think we should recognize that different
               processes meet different types of selection processes.  So
               selecting someone for an opening ceremony speaking slot is
               very different from selecting somebody to work on a working
               group for a period of one or two years.  And I think just to

 
 
 
 
 
               react to Norbert, I think the idea of independence, I think
               it's actually really difficult to establish that.  A lot of
               Civil Society organizations work very closely with their
               governments.  And I think it's good that they are
               transparent about that.  But it doesn't mean that they are
               not legitimate Civil Society groups.  So it makes it quite
               complex.  And as for being independent from business or this
               and that, then we get into kind of a thought police type of
               environment where you have to kind of check people's
               ideological purity which is tricky and could just undermine
               cohesion even further.  And I think just a back issue.
                  I think one of the differences, and efficiency and power,
               why is this -- is because Civil Society lacks the
               opportunity to really work together on specific issues.  And
               to develop coherent responses to do analysis and then -- and
               then pursue advocacy positions, where they do that you see
               them being quit sufficiently, access to knowledge and access
               to development treaties and you can also begin to see
               coalitions between Civil Society or business evolved.  And I
               think whatever process we use it needs to allow that to
               happen.
                  And then I think just another point, rotation versus
               continuity I think is a real problem.  I think we've ended
               up in the Internet Governance space with a process where
               it's almost as if people, everybody wants a turn to be a
               representative of Civil Society.  And I'm not saying that's
               not legitimate but if our goal is to pursue successful
               advocacy I think expertise and continuity becomes very
               important and I'm putting by ABC on, Norbert, where's that
               hat?  And for a group like APC, on the one hand, we -- we do
               a lot of advocacy and a lot of policy research and analysis
               and it's very important for us, we are, we use public funds.
               We raise our own funding to be able to pursue that advocacy.
               And then we work very hard to have access to spaces.  So we
               are often in a very awkward position because on the one hand
               we want to have access to negotiating spaces and working
               groups because that's what we do.  We work for that and we
               have goals and we have statements, they are transparent.
               They are available, but we don't represent all of Civil
               Society.  We represent ABC and ABC members so I sometimes
               think that a combination approach of the more traditional
               and accredited approach which gives expert space and access
               to Civil Society groups that do this work I'm sorry on an
               ongoing basis combined with a Non Com approach that gives
               more rotation and space for individuals and academics might
               work.  So I don't have all the answer, I know that it's not
               easy.
                  >>  :  Thank you Anriette.  Very interesting perspectives
               from all the panelists.  And it does beg the question where
               there's need for some sort of accountability and

 
 
 
 
 
               transparency mechanism whether that would have to be formal
               or informal or whether that's something that needs to be
               discussed or not but anyway, we don't want to hear from me.
               We want to hear from you.  So with that Nnenna, we would
               like to invite the remote participants if they have any
               questions.  If there are others if you would like to
               comment, come up nearer to the mic, we can have seem less
               interactions.  Nnenna.  Is this is only MIC?
                  >> NNENNA NWAKANMA:  I had two people offer comment
               online, having difficulties connecting.  Someone called and
               some other person called sham, but I don't have their
               opinion input for new.  This is my personal inputs, no hats
               on.  Just this scarf.  It's about the Civil Society because
               that's what many people online are also talking about on
               Twitter.  That complicated stakeholder, that cannot decide
               very easily, cannot organize very efficiently, cannot seem
               to agree on anything and my question to the panelists would
               be, but though they cannot get things out very easily, the
               gentleman from India did recognize that it was a Civil
               Society that brought the real issues to the table.  So my
               question would be, is it because in activism, we've had a
               long tradition of being mobilized against and as activists
               we're normally, we're either for or against so that has been
               our rest on ant, where we do things, okay, we don't like
               this, we always go against it.  We're always fighting for or
               fighting against and when we get into processes in which
               there is in clear for or against, then it becomes a problem
               because we are now forced into working with differences that
               exist within the Civil Society.  Do you think that that's
               correct?  That's what I'm thinking now.  Because I've been
               an activist for some years at, both my parents were
               activists, and I was born this way so it's not IGF's fault
               that I'm this way.  Okay.  Right.  Now the thing is we've
               always had things to fight for or fight against.  But when
               we come to IGF, there are no clear enemies and there are no
               clear friends and we end up being our own enemies?  Is that
               correct?
                  >>  :  We'll take another question.
                  >>  :  Yeah, I think Constance really hit the nail on the
               head when she showed the problem, highlight the problem
               between self representation and representation of others,
               right?  That in ITF everyone comes in just for themselves
               and I think that's a problem across the board, not just in
               the technical community.  So I actually a few questions if
               we have time if we do, then, okay, I'll try to do that.  One
               question, is ITF a multi-stakeholder, if so, who are the
               stakeholders?  And this is a -- this is an issue that kind
               of runs across the board, right?  If you look at the
               Internet architecture board, there are a total of 15 people.
               There are one or two academics, depending on how you count

 
 
 
 
 
               that.  There are 13 businesses represented, one NGO
               represented, two women and one person who is not Caucasian
               so the question of representativeness if we move from people
               are the elected, question of representativeness, this kinds
               of highlight in the ISO, board of trustees there is one
               person who is a developing country.  There are numerous
               people from the United States on the other hand.  In Civil
               Society, who is Civil Society?  How do you exclude people
               from Civil Society?  Do you decide on the base of NGO,
               nonprofit companies or what, the religious groups, important
               at national levels often.  Where are the trade unions, the
               environment list groups.  It's a very small community that's
               actually engaging in this process and individuals, if
               they're also allowed to be part of Civil Society, who are
               they accountable to at the end of the day.  If these were
               businesses, even if they are small companies, there is an
               accountability that's easier to answer.  They protect
               community.  There's not so much a question of accountability
               for Civil Society the question of accountability exists and
               no one has done any answering and Norbert mentioned -- as a
               rising star, right, how many people on best bet who are
               different from the people on IGC?  So has there been any
               attempt at creating a difference?  This is a different
               platform, sure.  But in terms of representation, there is
               nothing different about it.  In fact, it represents a
               smaller group, a smaller subset of IGC.
                  >> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Yeah, this is more like a comment
               and could also be a question.  I'm deeply interested in the
               show of independence.  And I'm interested in it because I
               look at Civil Society working with government as fanning out
               into different scenarios.  One in you're an act of a
               government, because in many countries where the democracy is
               not mature, our Civil Society so-called Civil Society set up
               by government, and in that case, you know, they might
               infiltrate quote unquote political Civil Society, political
               Civil Society which is independent.  The second scenario is
               that in traditional theories of politics, there is the state
               and then there is political Civil Society and within a
               democracy, of course this ideal public spirit -- anywhere,
               but they -- the hope is that somebody will speak on behalf
               or some set of organizations will speak on behalf of people
               as in democracy, I mean people.  And that, those voices can
               then actually be part of the political process and
               participate in public policy.  For me even the UN started to
               take individuals who -- that was about 10, 15 years ago,
               even the world bank did.  The process of working with
               institutions retaining your independence is very different
               from working as agents of government so I want to make that
               clarification, just adding to what Anriette had said about
               even people work very closely with governments of course you

 
 
 
 
 
               have to.  In a country like India, I believe that, the right
               to education act, the right to food bill which is being
               debated in parcel amount and, you know, is.
                  >>  :  My apologies, sorry, because of the brief time and
               we'd like lot of people to ask, could you be still and frame
               your question.
                  >> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  So let me comment, let me just
               finish it.  I won't take long.  I think the question of
               independence and people working with con should not be
               conflicted.  Secondly I think that independence from,
               independence with respect to who is funding you is a very
               important question.  And I think that allow has been written
               about it in India particularly over the past let's say 60
               years as to how the NGO movement has changed and there is
               certainly implications of that for what the panel has been
               discussing is the final outcomes for accountability.
                  >>  :  Thank you, thank you very much.  If we could just,
               thank you Anita, maybe we'll use that.  If you could have
               you ask your questions?  Nnenna, are there any in the.  Just
               before, yes, go ahead, Mike.
                  >> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  I think it's more in the form of a
               comment than a question.  I think the processes we're
               involved in are really quite important.  When we talk about
               selection, when we talk about the role of Civil Society --
               I'm sorry -- the role of the stakeholders, given the
               discussion that was held in this room the evening prior,
               we're talking about at least the future of the Internet
               within a multi-stakeholder environment.  The problem that I
               have is that the multi-stakeholder environment as I said in
               the, another session today is based on the notion of
               consensus and a commonality of norms, it's a normative
               consensus, an assumption of a normative consensus in each of
               the stakeholder groups and I think -- certainly I heard that
               explicitly in the technical community, implicitly in the
               business community and I think with an exception from the
               Civil Society where Anriette did recognize that there was
               divergence.  I think that that's a very dangerous thing is
               the assumption of consensus because in the absence of means
               to recognize and accommodate divergence, divergence of
               opinion, divergence of position, divergence of interest,
               conflict, then I think what we're talking about is a
               managed, undemocratic system, one of the strong points of
               democracy is that as methods for, organizing and managing
               conflict.  The kind of multi-stakeholder model that is being
               presented here and that's being discussed without definition
               yesterday and today is not one that seems to either
               accommodate or recognize or have any means of managing
               spooning to divergence and conflict and I think that -- I'd
               like to hear some response to that, how that's handled.  I
               should say that in Civil Society, there is -- there are some

 
 
 
 
 
               mechanisms for dealing with that.  And that's part of the, I
               guess the incoherence of Civil Society but I'd like to hear
               that on two levels.  One which has to do with overall the
               multi-stakeholder model and the issue of conflict within --
               the conflict in relation to the stakeholder structures.  And
               secondly, conflict in relation to the individual stakeholder
               elements, individual elements of the stakeholders.
                  >>  :  Thank you, Mike.  I'd just like to say that we'd
               like to thank everybody who has been giving feedback from
               the floor and also raising questions because you've haded
               four things to criteria that's been building up by the
               people.  Nnenna raised the issue of culture.  Anita raised
               the issue of independence and Mike raised the issue of
               democratization and legitimacy.  There is another question
               and straight up after the question we'll get the panel and
               we'll Hart with Ayesha first.  Do you have a mic?  Please
               introduce yourself.
                  >> AUDIENCE MEMBER:  Hi.  I'm Emma from Paris.  And I
               just had a comment on, general comment on everything that
               was kind of said and his, the final comment kind of aroused
               my interest and he says from what I understood that the
               current model of selecting individuals to represent each
               stakeholder group in the current Internet governance model
               isn't necessarily Democratic but in that sense what is a
               democracy, you have to have the representation of all the
               interests and how do you represent the interests if not by
               having a specialized person who best knows and understands
               the questions at stake and can designate a representative to
               speak for each of these communities?  And it also means --
               my friend, what she said on the fact that we are, Civil
               Society is its own enemy that Civil Society is so large and
               so vast that it -- it has really hard time trying to con
               ciliate all the different interests and I think -- I think
               finding a better process to designate people who can
               represent the interests would make the process more
               democratic because it would give a stronger role and
               strength ten role of each person.  So contrary to what the
               previous person said, I think that the selection process
               makes Internet Governance more democratic rather than making
               it less democratic, but that's just my independent and
               personal point of view.  No cap on.
                  >>  :  Someone called the --
                  >> NNENNA NWAKANMA:  Said she wants to see the photos of
               people when they wear their hats on.  So please don't put on
               the hat.  Take it off.  I need to take your pictures.  I'm
               making a photo album of the hats.  Thank you.
                  >>  :  Thank you, Nnenna.  Ayesha.
                  >> AYESHA HASSAN:  So, very briefly to respond to the
               divergence conflict consensus point that was made.  I just
               wanted to clarify within the ICC basis business community,

 
 
 
 
 
               actually we don't build any policy positions through the
               basis group.  All of our business policy positions are
               developed through a rigorous consensus building process
               within ICC as digital economy commission so by the time you
               take the issues that the basis initiative is trying to
               contribute to, we have a solid base of policy positions and
               the rest is really more positioning, political issues or
               decisions on process.  And there what we find is that the
               diverse sectors and geographically different businesses have
               common interests and it's really not that difficult a
               problem.
                  Within the MAG I would say having been there since the
               inception.  There are moments of conflict, there is an
               effort made by different people to facilitate, to find some
               way in which we can all be comfortable.  And I think that
               that's, that's a good thing and we all have been learning
               through that process, through the different -- the
               disagreements, I think all stakeholder groups over the years
               learn more about not only substance but procedural
               perspectives of the various stakeholder groups.  I hope
               that's responsive.
                  >>  :  I wanted to respond to the first point was, what
               my observation of Civil Society but on the whole issue of
               foreign.
                  >> VIRAT BHATIA:  So I think, my experience is about 11
               months dealing with Civil Society on sort of a regular
               basis.  On the issues of Internet Governance in India to
               address the issues.  So here are sort of my experiences of
               this extensive dialogue which is relatively short.  Three
               reasons why I think, one is the fact their DNA is for and
               against as they get up every morning.  That is what they do.
               It's an important thing for them.  You can't take that away
               just as businesses will make money.  That's what they do.
               The governments will do, write laws.  That's what they do
               and students -- so that's the DNA.  You can't that away
               however hard you try.
                  Second I think there are genuine differences in Civil
               Society between the position takes they attachment there are
               civil societies think that the government should be given a
               bigger role.  There are civil societies that the government
               shouldn't be given a bigger role.  There are some that
               believe it's critical, security, that's mare part of the pan
               date and the others are fighting for free speech.  So
               actually within the whole issue of cybersecurity, there are
               those in Civil Society who are fighting harder for
               cybersecurity, who are fighting harder for, you know, the
               separatists.  The general -- different position.  And the
               third part that I would say is actually, this is my
               experience, the most relevant one is I don't think they are
               trained professionally to work with each other.  And working

 
 
 
 
 
               coalitions in as much as businesses are.  Businesses have to
               get themselves into a room and have no choice but to find a
               way forward to the point of manufacturing consensus.  You
               cannot leave the room unless you leave your minor
               differences on the side and find a way forward by
               sacrificing your absolutist agenda.  Businesses are trained
               to do that.  Academicians are trained to do that because of
               the academy politics that goes on in colleges and
               institutions.  I think the technical community is very
               trained to do that, IT for example, to utilize that.  I
               think three of these reasons.  So they are for and against.
               There Republican general differences but also, I think
               other, the other stakeholders regularly work together in
               coalitions as industry associations where they're mandated
               to find a way to leave extreme ICT positions and move
               forward and to your point, the one point I wanted to make,
               comment that you made about consensus building, the
               difficulty is that some states, even in democracy, you've
               got to move forward and so people must sacrifice their
               absolute agenda.  We often do and everybody will have to do
               that and that is the only way they will have to move and I
               don't think that constitutes manufacturing consensus but
               that sort of makes common ground on what is often known in
               India as a common minimum programme.  Thank you.
                  >>  :  Andrea, would you like to respond?
                  >> ANRIETTE ESTERHUYSEN:  Thanks.  This one is better.
               Thanks for the opportunity.  I must say I have seen
               companies disagree with one another violently.  Particularly
               the -- and the Internet companies but I have also seen
               taking the OECD as an example.  I wouldn't say they
               necessarily reach consensus easily, but there is an
               agreement that consensus is more strategic in the end than
               division.  But I don't think we should under estimate the
               differences among -- yeah, yeah, absolutely.  I think good
               ideas have come up.  Just a few reactions.  I think we
               should approach this process by process.  I think different
               types of processes, different types of policy making
               institutions lend themselves to different modalities for
               nongovernmental stakeholder participation.  I think on the
               issue of independence, I think it's important, but I think
               it's very difficult to establish and I think the process of
               establishing it could be very divisive.  I think
               transparency on the other hand is not difficult.  And I
               think it is important for any publicly engaged institution
               to be transparent about how it's financed and also to make
               its positions and its values available.
                  But to decide who is truly independent and who is not
               will just result in witch hunting in my view within Civil
               Society.  I think the issue of represent activity --
               questions, that is the hardest question to answer and I

 
 
 
 
 
               think Civil Society is very rarely representative.  I
               personally believe Civil Society cannot claim to be
               representative.  It can claim to have expertise.  It can
               claim to have consulted with a particular community if a dam
               is being built in a village and Civil Society organization
               has done research and talked with that community, they can
               represent that community's interests, but it has to be
               assist on an issue by issue basis and then finally just to
               mention the example of where I think a specific case can
               result in a very good process is within the OECD.  There is
               a Civil Society structure called see sack and Miriam is here
               and that structure has a membership of about 18 individuals
               and organizations and a steering committee.  And when we
               have the opportunity to submit comments or represent Civil
               Society, we draw from among our membership those who have
               the expertise and the time to submit comment and content or
               negotiate and actually we've always manage to reach
               consensus.  And that process which is a more structured,
               traditional process, Civil Society group, elected steer
               committee, trusted among it's peers and then expert
               knowledge based input works quite well.
                  >>  :  Thank you, Anriette.  Who would have the question
               from the remote participant, I'm going to ask for your
               assistance and Norbert.
                  >>  :  We don't really have time for questions, Nnenna,
               I'm afraid.
                  >> NNENNA NWAKANMA:  It's a question, just a statement
               from Angelina who says it is because, in capitals, Civil
               Society is diverse and complex and messy that it is able to
               raise issues that no one else does.
                  >>  :  That's excellent.  That's a very good comment,
               comment to conclude this workshop and with that, thank you
               for turning up.  For those who are interested in workshop
               210, can you talk to George about it outside the, in the
               corridor.  And this workshop is officially concluded.  Thank
               you, everyone.  And just as I mentioned earlier, there will
               be a draft text and if you're interested in participating,
               please leave your business cards up here.  Thank you.
 

